/home/mkychsu/pool/TSMC/dataset/(Studies in Managerial and Financial Accounting Ser.) Seleshi Sisaye_ Jacob J. Birnberg_ Marc J. Epstein - Organizational Learning Approach to Process Innovations _ The Extent and Scope of Diffusion a.pdf
an organizational learning approach to process innovations: the extent and scope of diffusion and adoption in management accounting systemsstudies in managerial and financial accounting series editor: marc j. epstein recent volumes: volume 1: setting the standard for the new auditors report: an analysis of attempts to inﬂuence the auditing standards board volume 2: the shareholders use of corporate annual reports volume 3: applications of fuzzy logic and the theory of evidence to accountingvolume 4: the usefulness of corporate annual reports to shareholders in australia, new zealand, and the united states: an international comparison volume 5: a power control exchange framework of accounting: applications to management control systems volume 6: throughout modeling: financial information used by decision makersvolume 7: applications of fuzzy sets and the theory of evidence to accounting iivolume 8: corporate governance, accountability, and pressures to perform: an international studyvolume 9: the january effect and other seasonal anomalies: a common theoretical frameworkvolume 10: organizational change and development in management control systems: process innovation for internal auditing and management accounting volume 11: us individual federal income taxation: historical, contemporary and prospective policy issues volume 12: performance measurement and management control: a compendium of researchvolume 13: information asymmetry: a unifying concept for financial and managerial accounting theories. volume 14: performance measurement and management control: superior organization performance.volume 15: a comparative study of professional accountants’ judgementsvolume 16: performance measurement and management control: improving organizations and societyvolume 17: non-financial performance measurement and management practices in manufacturing firms: a comparative international analysis volume 18: performance measurement and management control: measuring and rewarding performance volume 19: managerial attitudes toward a stakeholder prominence within a southeast asia contextvolume 20: performance measurement and management control: innovative concepts and practicesvolume 21: reputation building, website disclosure and the case of intellectual capitalvolume 22: achieving global convergence of financial reporting standards: implications from the south paciﬁc region volume 23: globalization and contextual factors in accounting: the case of germanystudies in managerial and financial accounting volume 24 an organizational learning approach to process innovations: the extent and scope of diffusion and adoption in management accounting systems by seleshi sisaye duquesne university, pittsburgh, pa, usa jacob g. birnberg university of pittsburgh, pittsburgh, pa, usa united kingdom – north america – japan india – malaysia – chinaemerald group publishing limited howard house, wagon lane, bingley bd16 1wa, uk first edition 2012 copyright r2012 emerald group publishing limited reprints and permission service contact: booksandseries@emeraldinsight.com no part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, transmitted in any form or by any means electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwisewithout either the prior written permission of the publisher or a licence permitting restricted copying issued in the uk by the copyright licensing agency and in the usa by the copyright clearance center. no responsibility is accepted for the accuracy ofinformation contained in the text, illustrations or advertisements. the opinionsexpressed in these chapters are not necessarily those of the editor or the publisher. british library cataloguing in publication data a catalogue record for this book is available from the british library isbn: 978-1-78052-734-5 issn: 1479-3512 (series)in memory of eileen stommes, ph.d. june 20, 1947 to july 10, 2006contents about the authors ix acknowledgments xi introduction xiii 1. why innovations fail: organizational processes and structural barriers to innovations1 1.1 organizational processes and constraints of innovations 1 1.2 an overview of structural barriers to innovations 3 1.3 contingency framework of sociology 4 1.4 organizational learning: single and double loop 9 1.5 adoption and diffusion issues related to sf- and cr-based technological innovations15 1.6 adoption–diffusion and innovation lag 16 2. adoption and diffusion of process innovations in managementaccounting systems19 2.1 approaches to innovation 20 2.2 organizational learning: single- and double-loop learning within the context of management accounting innovations33 3. the extent and scope dimensions of process innovations41 3.1 an overview of the dimensions of extent and scope of innovations41 3.2 scope of innovation dimension: autonomous and systemic 46 3.3 management accounting innovations typologies 50 vii4. mechanistic and organic innovations 51 4.1 sf mechanist approaches 52 4.2 cell 1: mechanistic innovations 60 4.3 cell 2: organic innovations 63 4.4 effects of organizational structures on mechanistic and organic innovations65 5. organizational development (od) and organizational transformation (ot) process innovation strategies71 5.1 cell 3: organizational development 72 5.2 cell 4: organizational transformation 78 5.3 organizational development and transformation approaches in management accounting innovations84 6. organizational learning and process innovations: an integrated framework87 6.1 an overview of the literature on organizational learning 87 6.2 the two stages of organizational learning: adoption and diffusion97 6.3 organizational learning and the birth and bureaucratization of accounting rules104 6.4 the adoption–diffusion processes of organizational learning in the management accounting literature106 7. conclusion and implications for future research111 7.1 resource-based approach to organizational learning and performance111 7.2 conclusion: implications for future research 114 references 121 author index 133 subject index 139contents viiiabout the authors seleshi sisaye is professor of accounting at the palumbo-donahue school of business, duquesne university. his research interests are in organiza- tional sociology, management control systems, process innovations,sustainable development, and reporting. his publications have appearedin accounting, management, sociology, and international developmentjournals. he has assumed leadership positions within the accounting, behaviour and organization sections of the american accounting association. he holds two phds in development sociology from cornelluniversity and accounting from the university of pittsburgh. jacob g. birnberg is the robert w. murphy jr. professor emeritus of management control systems at katz graduate school of business, university of pittsburgh. he has published extensively in the leadingaccounting, management, and psychology journals in the areas of behavioral accounting, management control systems, behavioral decision making, among others. he has received numerous teaching, research, andservice awards from the university of pittsburgh, american accountingassociation, accounting, behaviour, and organizations and managementaccounting sections. his phd is in accounting from the university ofminnesota. ixacknowledgments it is difﬁcult to list the names of those individuals who have supported our research over the years from the inception to the ﬁnal completion of thebook. we acknowledge those individuals who have provided their generoustime and assistance over the years. first, we express our appreciation todr. marc epstein, distinguished research professor of management, jonesgraduate school of business, rice university, studies in managerial andfinancial accounting series editor. we have worked and collaborated with marc for many years. we are very grateful for his continued support and encouragement, which made it possible for us to complete the book on atimely basis. we are highly indebted to ms. emma whitﬁeld; editorial staffof emerald group publishing limited for her generous assistance inproviding us the time needed to complete the book. emma has beeninstrumental in arranging editorial assistance, in particular in the prepara-tion of the subject index consistent with emerald publishing requirements. the genesis of the ideas discussed in this book can be found in two articles that we published in 2010. they are ‘‘organizational development andtransformational learning approaches in process innovations: a reviewof the implications to the management accounting literature,’’ review of accounting and finance , vol. 9, no. 4, 2010, pp. 337–362; and ‘‘extent and scope dimensions of diffusion and adoption of process innovations inmanagement accounting systems,’’ international journal of accounting and information management , vol. 18, no. 2, 2010, pp. 118–139. they are published by emerald publishing group. we are very grateful for emerald copyright policies that enabled us to use the materials from these two articles throughout the book. ms. margaret m. vojtko has provided expert editorial assistance in the preparation of the ﬁrst draft of the book. we thank margaret for her timethat she has freely invested in the early stages of the preparation of themanuscript. mrs. debbie kennedy has been very kind in putting togetherthe reference list, author index, and table of contents. she has providedskillful secretarial assistance in typing the entire manuscript of the book as well as the supplements. we are indebted to debbie for all the work that she put in the book and the generous time that she has provided in getting the ximanuscript ready on a timely basis. shutian zheng has provided valuable research assistance in bibliographic search, content analysis and experttechnical assistance in the early stages of the manuscript preparation. last, but not the least, we thank stephanie birnberg for her support and encouragement throughout the publication process. we have most beneﬁtedfrom the support that we have received from our family and the sacriﬁcesthey have made to support our project. we are dedicating the book in memory of eileen stommes, phd, for her outstanding public service and devotion to her family and friends. eileen hasbeen a good friend and colleague, has published and contributed substan-tially in the areas of agricultural marketing and transportation, and ruraldevelopment. she is survived by her husband, dr. seleshi sisaye, and daughters, sarah laura and anne elizabeth sisaye. we are pleased to dedicate our book in recognition of her work and accomplishments as aprofessional, colleague, wife and mother of her two beloved daughters.acknowledgments xiiintroduction research in management accounting systems over the years has been shaped by theories and methodologies adapted from the social science disciplines.sociology is one of those social science disciplines that have impactedresearch in management accounting. sociological theory in organizationallearning, and adoption and diffusion of innovation has been utilized inmanagement accounting research. in the past 20 years, the most signiﬁcantdevelopments have included the application of gradual and transforma- tional organizational learning theories from sociology to management accounting systems research. organizational learning has been viewed as a source of competitive advantage that helps organizations respond to changes in their institutionalenvironments by adopting and diffusing innovations that will contributetoward improving their performance. organizational learning encompassesnew insights, knowledge, and modiﬁcation of behaviors. learning occursthrough adoption of new technologies, shared experiences, knowledge, and mental models. an organization’s effective diffusion of innovations borrowed from outside the organization can become part of the learningstrategy and contributes to successfully redirecting an organization’sstrategies to help it adapt to the ever-changing business environment. in organizational behavior and sociology literatures, organizational learning refers to the study of how organizations respond and adapt tonew and changing environments by adopting innovative practices. whenthis occurs, the learning process in organizations is assumed to involve the adoption and diffusion of innovations in the organization. this view is based on the literature in sociology. management accounting literature is concerned with the design of manage- ment accounting systems. an important aspect of this study is processinnovations and their implementation. recent innovations in accountingsystems, such as activity-based costing (abc), have been addressed and studiedextensively. this literature has recognized that, because the process ofimplementing any innovation in organizations is multifaceted, it needs to address questions such as why certain innovations succeed and others fail, and why the same innovation is successful in one organization and not in another. xiiithese questions are the focus of this book. the book describes in detail the learning methodologies that organizations pursue in the design and implementation of management accounting innovations. we argue thatorganizations utilize sociological process innovation approaches to appraise the structural, cultural, and human resource capabilities that will both contribute to the success of management accounting innovations and, at thesame time, minimize such constrains as could lead to their failure. werecognize that, at present, there is no generally accepted framework insociology to aid us in making such an evaluation. consequently, there is nointegrative framework with which to study accounting innovations asorganizational learning. instead, this book contributes to expanding theory and methods in management accounting literature by utilizing a contingency frameworkfrom literatures that deal with organizational learning and the sociology ofadoption and diffusion theories. this framework is applied to the studyof organizational learning to understand better the success or failure ofmanagement accounting innovations implementations. as noted earlier, thebook addresses two sets of interrelated questions commonly associated withmanagement accounting innovations: /c15the ﬁrst set of questions relates to why are some management accounting innovations more successful than others? /c15the second set of questions addresses why are innovations successful insome organizations but not in others? we develop a process innovation framework to understand these research questions consisting of four types of innovations. the contingency frame-work we propose argues that, the management accounting innovations incomplex organizations can best be understood by examining two behavioral and structural characteristics present in any innovation. these are referred to as the extent and the scope dimension of an innovation. the extent dimension denotes the degree to which the organization’s existing systemsare affected, whereas, scope has been deﬁned as the proportion (number) of units within the organization that are impacted by the innovation. the extent and scope dimensions of innovations are adopted from the organizational behavior literature. in that literature, extent of innovations is subdivided into technical and administrative, and the scope of innovations is subdivided into autonomous and systemic. by integrating these twodimensions, we developed four types of process innovation: mechanistic,organic, organizational development (od) and organizational transforma-tion (ot). these are presented in table 1.introduction xivdefinition of terms a glossary of deﬁnitions is provided below to familiarize the reader with some of the sociology and organizational behavior literature terminology usedthroughout this book. we also relate this terminology to managementaccounting concepts to combine these two streams of literature into anintegrated process innovation framework in management accounting systems. innovation innovation has been viewed as an intentional attempt to introduce newideas, products, technologies, administrative programs, or other process changes in an organization. innovation is either induced internally or necessitated externally. in management accounting, these new programsmay include the introduction of quality improvement programs and changesin management accounting control and/or reporting systems. process innovation process innovation addresses the ways new ideas are implemented to changeorganizational activities, including the management accounting reportingand control systems. process innovation is concerned with generatingacceptance among those charged with implementation. whereas innovation,in general, is an ongoing process that evolves over a period of time, processinnovations in management accounting control systems often involve incremental change strategies that are either technical or administrative in nature. when an organization introduces an innovation, the effect of thatinnovation will be inﬂuenced by the learning strategy that the organizationadopts as part of the innovation process. this choice will affect thetable 1. typologies of management accounting innovations based on extent and scope of innovations dimensions. scope extenttechnicalautonomous systemic cell 1: mechanistic cell 2: organic administrativecell 3: organizational developmentcell 4: organizational transformationintroduction xvmagnitude of the organization’s innovation strategies (od or ot) and the relative extent of change (technical or administrative). diffusion of innovation diffusion of innovation addresses the ﬂow and the process by which information is spread throughout the organization. an example of an innovation that affects accounting directly is abc. innovations indirectlyaffecting the accounting function are just-in-time technology (jit), totalquality management (tqm), or business process reengineering (bpr). organizational learning in organizational behavior literature, organizational learning is referred to asthe study of how organizations adapt to new and changing environments byadopting innovative practices (see davenport, 1993 ). it is related to diffusion analysis in sociology ( rogers, 1971, 1995 ; rogers & shoemaker, 1971). organizational learning has also been viewed as a source of competitive advantage that helps organizations to respond to changes in their respective institutional environments and, in turn, to adopt innovations that willimprove performance. ‘‘organizational learning entails new insights andmodiﬁed behavior. [it] occurs through shared insights, knowledge, andmental models’’ ( stata, 1989, p. 64 ). an organization’s effective utilization of innovation is enabled by its learning strategy ( attewell, 1992 ;fichman & kemerer, 1997 ;lant & mezias, 1992 ;mezias & glynn, 1993 ;schulz, 2001 ), contributes to its ability to redirect its strategy successfully ( windrum, 2001 ), improve business performance ( lopez et al., 2005 ), and to adapt to its changing competitive environment. organizational learning has been described as a two-stage process: single- loop and double-loop learning ( argyris & schon, 1978, 1996 ). incremental change strategies are embedded in single-loop learning, whereas radicalchange approaches are associated with double-loop learning. single-loop learning single-loop learning is used to describe those accretions in an organization’sknowledge that result in incremental changes. single-loop learning is intended to ﬁnd better ways (i.e., new knowledge) of doing what the organization already is doing. the objective of single-loop learning is to ﬁnd new waysand methods to accelerate organizational learning and improvements.these changes can occur in various ways. for example, an organization’sintroduction xvimanagement accounting system may alter the overhead allocation base from labor hours to machine hours as a particular process becomes moreautomated. some organizations change through trial and error; otherchanges are planned such as the decision to adopt an innovation that has been successful elsewhere. the rationale for adopting an innovation in these cases is the cost-beneﬁt analysis. this is the essence of single-loop learning. double-loop learning double-loop learning has been associated with new knowledge that leads toradical or innovative changes in the organization. double-loop learningoccurs when an organization either detects or corrects errors in the operatingprocedures/activities or when it signiﬁcantly modiﬁes existing operating pro-cedures ( van de ven, 1986 ). double-loop learning leads an organization to institute new procedures to transform the way the organization conducts itsactivities. double-loop learning also occurs when an organization is able to ‘‘detect and correct errors in the operating norms’’ and activities of the organization(van de ven, 1986, p. 603 ). double-loop learning allows an organization to institute new norms and procedures to transform organizational activities. itis second-order learning that leads to reorientation ( lant & mezias, 1992 ). it is associated with discontinuous change ( bessant, 2005 ) and development of new paradigms to do things differently than in the past. for example, if anorganization adopts a new approach to inventory costing such as abc, it isprimarily limited to technical innovations and do not involve transforma-tional changes. technical innovation damanpour and evan (1984) deﬁned technical innovation as focusing on improving the technological performance of the organization. technicalchanges in accounting focus on improving the techniques by whichaccountants gather, process, calculate, and report data on operatingactivities of the organization. activity-based costing as a technical innovation abc is a technical innovation in calculating product costs. abc provides accounting information about the cost of activities associated withproducing goods and delivering them to customers. activity drivers thatgenerate costs are assigned to products and customers, while cost drivers areintroduction xviiassigned to all activities that generate those costs. product costs are determined by adding the costs of each activity incurred in making theproduct ( kaplan, 1989 ). overhead is identiﬁed with activities that generate costs, rather than being allocated to products or operating departments based on pre-existing allocation bases. the objective of abc is to eliminate non-value-added activities that do not contribute to improved performance(argyris & kaplan, 1994 ;kaplan, 1989 ). administrative innovation damanpour and evan (1984) described administrative innovation ‘‘as those that occur in the social system of an organization yan administrative innovation can be the implementation of a new way to recruit personnel, allocate resources, and structure tasks, authority and rewards. it comprises innovation in organizational structure and in the management of people’’(p. 394). when management accounting control systems are introduced asadministrative innovations, they perform organizational control functionsto monitor, motivate, or conduct performance evaluation. abc as an administrative innovation implementation requires the structural support of formalization, centraliza-tion, and decision making in the organization’s bureaucratic structure.thus, abc can also involve elements of an administrative innovation when the change requires several adaptive process stages before the costing system itself can be successfully initiated and implemented. a critical part of theinitiation process may include a program about attitudinal change,education and training, and strong management support. autonomous innovation innovations can be either autonomous (standalone) or systemic (integra-tive). teece (1996) deﬁned an autonomous innovation as ‘‘one that can be introduced without modifying other components or items of equipment component or device;’’ in other words, it ‘‘stands alone’’ (p. 205). while technological innovations are self-contained (autonomous), administrativeinnovations involve structural re-alignment, personnel changes, and a widerange of organizational levels and tasks for adoption of innovation changes.introduction xviiisystemic innovation a systemic innovation requires ‘‘signiﬁcant readjustment to other parts of the system’’ (teece, p. 205). in systemic innovation, information ﬂows are integrated to minimize institutional barriers to innovation. systemic innovations in accounting require coordination of resources: personnel,ﬁnancial and material, as well as sharing information technology andcommunication channels across units to implement a managed inventoryscheduling system. abc as a systemic innovation abc assumes ‘‘that manufacturing is an integrated process that starts whensupplies, materials, and parts arrive at the plant’s loading dock and continueeven after the ﬁnished product reaches the end user. service is still a cost ofthe product, and as is installation, even if the customer pays’’ ( drucker, 1995, p. 55 ). abc takes a systemic approach in analyzing and integrating ‘‘what was once several activities – value analysis, process analysis, qualitymanagement, and costing – into one analysis’’ ( drucker 1995, p. 55 ). the institutional framework barnett and carroll (1995) classiﬁed institutional theory as an adaptive change process framework because it examines the impact of externalenvironmental factors and market conditions on organizational change anddevelopment (pp. 217–218). the institutional approach focuses on adaptivechange strategy to improve existing systems, technologies, products, and services ( mezias & glynn, 1993 ). however, the institutional framework emphasizes the functional approach of maintaining the existing organizational structures and systems whether the process innovation change is either incremental or radical.incremental changes seek solutions that help an organization adapt to theenvironment with minimal structural change (e.g., tqm). radical changesadvocate signiﬁcant process innovations that require a complete transfor-mation of the organization’s mission, strategies, and leadership (e.g., bpr). the institutional framework maintains that organizations, irrespective of their structural arrangements (mechanistic or organic), can successfullychange if they implement adaptive strategies of either incremental or radicalchange to implement process innovation.introduction xixmanagement accounting process innovation typologies we have classiﬁed four types of innovations in management accounting systems. we combined extent (technical and administrative) and scope (autonomous and systemic) to identify four types of innovations: mechan-istic, organic, od, and ot as shown in table 1. mechanistic innovationsthe term ‘‘mechanistic innovations’’ is deﬁned as both technical (extent)and autonomous (scope) innovations. when environmental change isinternal, and the response is incremental (single loop), the innovationstrategy is labeled mechanistic. as mechanistic innovations occur frequentlyin large manufacturing and production-oriented organizations. manufac-turing organizations have functional structures suited for processing non-complex, routine, and repetitive large-scale tasks that do not require specialization of technical expertise. functional organizations have bureaucratic structures that are hierarchi- cally differentiated with several layers of management hierarchy. vertical and horizontal hierarchical arrangements and differentiation are required toprocess the workﬂow. differentiation and specialization eventually con-tribute to formalized control systems and relationships that createcommunication barriers and reduce the ﬂow of information. decisionmaking becomes centralized, with minimal involvement of lower manage- ment levels. these characteristics make innovation across units more difﬁcult. organic innovations organic innovations are deﬁned as characterized by administrative (extent) and systemic (scope) of process innovations. when external environmentalconditions result in incremental (single loop) change, managementaccounting innovation follows an organic strategy. in sociology, the wordorganic describes organizational structures that are ﬂexible and adaptable tochanges in their institutional environments. organic structures havehorizontal hierarchy, little differentiation, limited chain of command,minimal bureaucratic features, and decentralized decision making, all of which facilitate the ﬂow of information and the dissemination of innovation within the organization ( burns & stalker, 1961 ). there is less reliance on formal control systems to monitor employee and organizationalperformance.introduction xxorganizational development od refers to the third typology in the innovation process. od is deﬁned astechnical (extent) and systemic (scope) innovations. when environmentalchange is internal, and the response to change is radical (double loop), innovation follows an od strategy. od is used in organizational change and sociology literature to describe cultural innovation programs intended tomodify employee cognition and behavior. in accounting, the od approachis important because accounting innovations, for example, abc, aredirected to change management behavior and their use of accounting datato evaluate performance. od applies to the use of abc data at the divisi-onal or unit level. organizational transformation ot refers to the fourth typology in the process of innovation framework. ot has been deﬁned as administrative (extent) and systemic (scope) innovation. when changes in the external environment initiate radicalchange (double-loop learning), process innovation adheres to an otintervention strategy. ot is targeted to change organizational structuresas well as individual and groups within the organization. ot change inprograms has a broad scope that requires comprehensive change in theorganizational paradigm. this paradigm shift affects behavior across theentire organization, thereby creating new behaviors that provide employees with a new way of viewing their jobs. ot intervention leads to both cognition change and commitment to radical change. radical technologicalinnovations such as bpr have made signiﬁcant structural changes inmanufacturing processes, inventory, and production scheduling, deliverytechniques, product design, and quality improvements. the impact of information technology on ot information technology is critical for ot process innovation. accounting asa ﬁnancial and economic information system thus becomes the cornerstoneof the business process. as information managers, accountants monitor information on organizational performance to assess that requires improvement, the need for functional integration of accounting systemsthat connect organizational units, and appraise the readiness of the human,ﬁnancial, and technological resources to carry out business innovation.introduction xxiod and ot approaches in abc accounting innovations can either follow an od or ot innovation strategy. the initial adoption of an innovation decision (experimental stage) is generally limited to a single unit or department. while od innovation intervention is limited to a single organizational unit or function, otfocuses on changing several units or functions with interdependentoperating activities. od and ot intervention play complementary roles,because od intervention is often critical in the adoption/initiation decision,and ot intervention is required during implementation. organization of the book we apply the process innovation framework to suggest guidelines on how toaddress the two questions posed above: why some innovations fail and otherssucceed and why some innovations are successfully implemented in someorganizations, but fail in others. the framework is applied to study recent management accounting innovations including abc and balanced scorecard (bsc). we elaborate that the success of management accounting innovationsdepends on the degree to which the strategy adopted by the organizations isappropriate for the extent and scope dimensions of the innovation they desireto adopt and diffuse. these organizational innovations can be successfullydesigned and implemented within the context of these four typologies. inother words, the process of adoption and diffusion in managementaccounting innovations can be planned and implemented following these four types of organizational process innovation. accordingly, this book is organized into seven chapters. we have included in the book table of contents, acknowledgments, references (bibliography) as well as subject and author indices. a summary of the chapters areprovided below. chapter 1 discusses the organizational processes and structural barriers to the diffusion and adoption of innovations. in this chapter, we address thequestion of ‘‘why innovations fail?’’ we discuss barriers to innovations to describe why innovations may fail. we argue that failure of potentially beneﬁcial innovations is primarily associated with leadership characteristicsand/or employees’ resistance to change. we review the sociology andaccounting literature and discussed several possible issues that contribute tointroduction xxiiresistance to innovations. some of these include lack of enthusiasm among innovation champions, resource constraints to undertake innovations, aswell as improper framing or a lack of perceived beneﬁts. this is particularlytrue when innovations involve radical and transformational changes in existing systems. single-loop as a gradual and double-loop as a radical approach to organizational learning are discussed within the context ofbarriers to innovations. chapter 2 addresses the organizational learning strategies of adoption and diffusion of process innovation approaches. we reviewed the literature inorganizational sociology and organizational behavior to extend the adoptionand diffusion analysis to management accounting systems. in chapter 3, wepresent the theoretical framework of organizational learning and process innovations. we discuss the four dimensions used to deﬁne the extent of innovations (technical and administrative), and the scope of innovations(autonomous and systemic). the chapter brieﬂy introduces the four types ofinnovations that are discussed in details in the next two chapters. in chapters 4 and 5, we present the four typologies of innovations in detail. research questions related to these four typologies are discussed inthese chapters. chapter 4 compares mechanistic and organic innovationsand chapter 5 od and ot innovations. these two chapters relate accounting innovations and systems to the four types of innovations. accounting innovations have been largely inﬂuenced by developments inmanagement philosophies such as tqm and bpr. these managementphilosophies are discussed, and are related to management accountingchanges and developments. chapter 6 elaborates the organizational learning framework by incorpor- ating the two stages in sociological theories of process innovations: adoptionand diffusion. we present these two stages of innovation within the framework of od and ot innovation strategies and relate them to management accounting innovations, namely abc and bsc. chapter 7 is the conclusion. it summarizes the argument and discusses areas for future research that can be addressed within this framework.particular points raised are on the need by researchers and policy makers toapproach the subject of management accounting innovations as multi-disciplinary particularly when the implementation of innovations addressescultural, organizational, and human resource capabilities and constraints. we raise several research questions and discuss the policy implications of the organizational learning framework that we promote for the adoption anddiffusion of process innovations.introduction xxiiichapter 1 why innovations fail: organizational processesand structural barriers to innovations this chapter asks ‘‘why do some desirable innovations fail?’’ and discusses potential barriers to innovations. we address structural barriers to innova-tions within the context of organizational processes and the constraints ofinnovations. 1.1. organizational processes and constraints of innovations strange and soule (1998) outlined the processes of innovations as follows. ‘‘innovations are novel (at least to the adopting community), making communication a necessary condition for adoption. innovations are also culturally understood as progressive, strengthening the hand of changeagents. and since innovations are risky and uncertain, adopters carefullyweigh the experience of others before acting’’ (p. 267). zaltman, duncan, and holbek (1973) utilized a sociological framework to approach innovations within the context of organizational change andmanagement. they also suggested that innovations involve ideas orpractices that are considered new or novel by those individuals, groups, or organizations that are adopting them, and, therefore are a potential risk to the adopters. in other works, innovations have contextual implicationsbecause the process involves their adoption by organizational members. inview of the fact that innovation involves learning new knowledge and 1acquiring new behaviors, it requires an organizational structure and context that supports innovations and their effective planning and implementation.these systems should be able to identify problems and act on them. thus,organizations manage innovations by organizing their activities through an ongoing trial and error process. over time, these behaviors become routines in the form of policies, procedures, and structures. they determine thecourse of the innovation ( bessant, 2005, pp. 35–37 ). innovation as a learning mechanism is a continuous process of adaptive learning that requires breaking away from existing assumptions thatfocus on knowledge stabilization and inhibit change and adopting thoseactivities that make viable the emergence of possible knowledge from newinstruments. these new instruments may involve dialogue, intervention techniques, reﬂections from transactions, and constructions of positions in the ﬁeld or area of interventions – all to destabilize existing knowledgeand open up new possibilities and movements in different directions(engestroom, 2007, pp. 271–275 ). on the contrary, innovation as a process of intervention strategy follows a sequence of two stages. according to zaltman et al. (1973) , the ﬁrst is the initiation stage that involves an awareness of the new idea or technologies. the second stage is the implementation stage thatincludes the adoption of the innovation. when innovations are adopted, they become key factors in enhancing the competitive position of organizations. organizational and environmentalfactors inﬂuence the innovative capability of organizations and improvetheir strategic position within the industry and market. resources can act asconstraints or enablers in the adoption of the innovation processes.organizations that have slack resources are in better competitive positions torealize the beneﬁts of innovation. herold, jayaraman, and narayanaswamy (2006) refer to organizational slack as resources available to organizations in excess of those required to meet their current needs. it implies thatorganizations have a cushion or excess resources to adopt innovations(p. 373). march and simon (1958) , and cyert and march (1963) viewed slack as conducive to an organization differentiating between goals and innovations. inother words, increased slack might increase an organization’s willingness andability to take risks associated with innovations because an unsuccessfulinnovation is less of a threat to the organization’s ongoing activities. for example, herold et al. (2006) found a relationship between slack and the undertaking of innovations ‘‘for industries that rely more on patentprotection.’’ these ﬁrms need protection because they ‘‘need to be efﬁcientin these activities in order to remain competitive’’ (p. 387). in other words,they want to avoid unnecessary use of resources for the future beyond whatorganizational learning and process innovations 2they currently need to undertake innovations. these organizations have learned through experience with previous innovations how to balance andmanage their resources to be competitive. by contrast, resources are aconstraint when there are shortages of available funds to ﬁnance the cost of a proposed innovation and create barriers to the initiation and/or adoption process. from a population ecologist perspective, resources are also dependent on geographical location that can inﬂuence resource availability and competi-tion. barnett and carroll (1987) suggested that companies in different locations are more competitive regardless of organizational form in contrastto companies that are located in the same or in nearby geographical areas.their critical point is when location creates interdependencies among organizations; the environment (i.e., location) serves to determine the degree of competition or interdependence among them. in addition, employee resistance to innovations, inadequate information ﬂows within the organization resulting in misinformation, inability todetermine market and customer reactions or support to innovations alsocan be barriers to a successful outcome. structural barriers and constraintsarising from organizational factors associated with coordination, centraliza-tion, and bureaucratized (inﬂexible) managerial control system can be potential obstacles to and hindrance in the successful adoption of innovations. 1.2. an overview of structural barriers to innovations given adequate resources, failure of potentially beneﬁcial innovations isprimarily associated with aspects of leadership and/or resistance to change. the sociology and accounting literatures suggest that possible issues thatcontribute to resistance to innovations include improper framing or a lackof perceived beneﬁts. this is particularly true when innovations involveradical and transformational changes in the existing system. we have advanced the view that barriers to innovations are greatest when innovations are complex, such as accounting innovations in multipledivisions and/or units. these accounting innovations involve both technical and administrative changes. they shape divisional and/or unit performance, and, in the process, they inﬂuence the allocation of rewards and incentivesamong managers. they may be actively resisted by managers when themanagers believe the technological and administrative innovations arewhy innovations fail 3related to performance evaluation and management compensation and could adversely impact them. these impediments to innovations inaccounting will be within the context of activity-based costing (abc) andthe balanced scorecard (bsc). we also suggest that there are cultural and organizational factors that explain why some innovations fail to be adopted even when suchinnovations would meet the requirement of having positive expectedeconomic returns to the organization and the managers. we identify thesefactors to be associated with the failure of the rewards to be perceived by thepotential adopters as meeting their needs (rewarding them) or requiring toogreat an expenditure of resources (time and effort as well as money) on theirpart relative to their expected beneﬁts. it is also possible that what may be beneﬁcial from the organization’s perspective is detrimental to a speciﬁc manager(s). this can occur for various reasons ranging from poorleadership to an inappropriate reward structure. thus, the adoption anddiffusion of innovations is contingent upon organizational contextual andstructural characteristics. in the next section, we utilize the contingencyframework to describe those factors that either create barriers orimpediments and/or facilitate the design and implementation of processinnovations. 1.3. contingency framework of sociology the sociological contingency framework applies open systems theory anddecision-making approaches that take into consideration external environ-mental factors. these include social, economic, political, governmental,environmental, socio-cultural, market, and technological developments (steiner, 1979 ;steiner, miner, & gray, 1982 ;yasairdekani & nystrom, 1996). these factors are of interest to researchers whether or not contingency guidelines are appropriate and adaptable to speciﬁc decision- making situations/contexts ( tushman, newman, & romanelli, 1986 ). the sociological contingency framework relates the development of strategic decisions as mediating organizational resource allocation decisionsas organizations attempt to allocate their limited scarce resources orcompetencies to maximize business opportunities by minimizing current potential environmental threats ( porter, 1980 ). the contingency approach thus provides a situational and an ‘‘if-then’’ strategic decision-making guideline, tailored to speciﬁc organizational decisions, which includemanagement accounting innovations. an ‘‘if-then’’ perspective allows theorganizational learning and process innovations 4consideration of the extent to which changes in external ecological and environmental factors inﬂuence decisions regarding the allocation oforganizational resources. the contingency framework thus enables organi-zations to develop strategies to match the requirements of their external environment with internal resources and capabilities to adopt and diffuse the appropriate process innovations ( sisaye, 2011 ). organizations attempt to change and adapt their strategies contingent on both institutional (internal) and market (external) forces. the characteristicsof leadership and top management composition, that is, whether or notthere exists heterogeneity involving age, sex, tenure, education, values,experience; inﬂuences, whether or not management takes a broad or narrowscope in viewing problems/opportunities that shapes the type of strategic change the organization undertakes. naranjo-gil and hartman (2007) utilized the prospector vs. defender typology from the strategy literature to determine whether or not management utilized broad or narrow views ofstrategic change in adopting management accounting systems (mas). theyfound that prospector organizations looked for ﬂexibility and a broader andmore interactive scope in their mas compared to defender organizations.the latter opted for a narrower scope of mas to support the strategies theyadopt to manage the institutional and market forces faced by the organization. it would appear that organizational performance is contingent upon the existence of a ﬁt between selected strategic structural factorsrelated to strategy type – prospectors and defenders ( simons, 1987 ). in general, contingency factors shape the strategic posture and performance of organizations. simon (2007) discussed several contingency factors related to strategy deliberations arising from emergent andambiguous to planned conditions and market orientations. he suggestedthat where accountants were involved in decision making, mas had roles in strategic decisions of organizations. strategic decisions in organizations involve contingent situations that are ambiguous and unknown. process innovations in organizations are strategic decisions because they require resource allocations and management’s willingness to accept therisks-failures or beneﬁts-success associated with the initiations and adoptionof innovations. the learning strategy that the organization utilizes in theadoption of innovations shapes the scope (breadth or depth) of theinnovations. sociology offers two competing approaches; the structural functional (sf) and the conﬂict radical (cr) approaches (see sisaye, 2011 ). we have incorporated both of them to describe organizational learning effectiveness in process innovations decisions. we utilize both approaches asis appropriate to better understand organizational learning.why innovations fail 5single-loop and double-loop learning are associated with each of the sf and cr approaches. sociological contingency frameworks of both the sf (single-loop) and cr (double-loop) approaches are applied to examine theextent to which environmental factors, industrial organizational structures, technological developments, ecological issues, government regulatory agen- cies, and cultural and social forces shape decisions that may contribute toconﬂicting goals in society. as we discuss below, the two approaches viewproblems facing the organization quite differently and take sharply differingviews of organizational learning. 1.3.1. the structural functional theoretical framework the sf approach takes a more focused view. it examines the functional andinstitutional importance of structures in societal change. it studies the mostimportant components of the social system and the characteristics of theorganization as a whole. because in the sf approach each organization isconsidered unique, the approach advocates a contingency view of organi-zations, that is, the appropriate course of action for a speciﬁc organizationis dependent on the characteristics of the organization’s internal and/or external environment. the contingency approach accounts for those particular social relationships that deﬁne a given system (i.e., organization,sub-unit or group of sub-units), where changes occur within the system, andwhat types of change characterize the system. to set the social context of agiven organization, the sf contingency approach deﬁnes the test ofsigniﬁcance in terms of its functional relevance for the maintenance of theorganization’s social systems that are being studied. social structures, in turn, have causal effects on actors, individual and group behaviors, and on social relationships. they provide networks whereactors can interact in meaningful exchange relationships ( whitmeyer, 1994, pp. 153–156 ). when exiting structures modify or change, it is expected that actors’ behaviors also change. in searching for legitimacy, organizations adopt structures and proce- dures that are accepted by their political and social environment. thesestructures are diffused across several organizations that operate in the samecultural environment ( ribeiro & scapens, 2006, p. 96 ) and organizations successfully operating in similar environments can be expected to exhibitsimilar structures. according to ambrose and schminke (2003) , structures have deﬁned and recurring sets of behavioral relationships amongorganization members. these structures consist of those charters, powerorganizational learning and process innovations 6relationships, rules and regulations that determine work behaviors, power relationships, and decision-making processes in the organization. ambrose and schminke (2003) described organizations as consisting of two types of structures: mechanistic and organic. these organizational structures do affect or inﬂuence performance of individuals and teams/groups (pp. 295–296). they will be discussed in subsequent chapters. functional structures affect the distribution of positional power in organizations. in this context, structural power refers to power acquiredthrough the formal position occupied in the organizational hierarchy(krackhardt, 1990, p. 345 ). structural power provides access to organizational resources. to have access to these resources, actors employ several forms ofstructural powers: positional or legitimate. the tactics that actors employ to translate power potential to power use affects the resultant structural power advantage to inﬂuence others in accepting process innovations ( brass & burkhardt, 1993, pp. 444, 449 ). therefore, it is critical to understand the sf- rational assumptions and their relationships to organizations and manage-ment, and the impact on process innovations decisions. the sf approach argues that the organization consists of two major goal- directed systems or functions. these are task and social systems. sfresearchers that view organizations as tasksystem focus on the technical and productive orientation of the organization. we have referred to this as the‘‘mechanistic’’ or ‘‘production’’ view of process innovations. under theproduction view, the concern is on task accomplishment and the primary consideration is on the economic efﬁciency and effectiveness of processinnovation programs and initiatives ( kabanoff, 1991, p. 419 ). morgan (1986) has advanced the technical/production and task orienta- tion view of organization. he used the machine metaphor, which isanalogous to the mechanistic view. the metaphor assumes that organiza- tions process operational characteristics in the same way as machines. like machines, they have mechanistic systems that operate efﬁciently. theirbehavior is predictable. organizations, like machines, are controlled bymanagement through budgets and standards. in this setting, organizationalmanagement is viewed in a way that is akin to a machine on a short-termbasis where budgets and accounting performance indicators play importantroles in measuring individual/organizational performance. on the contrary, the social-system view of the organization has been concerned with relational issues that affect the maintenance of thesystem components of the organization. according to kabanoff (1991) , the social-system view has stressed those factors that are related to employeeorientation and consideration, social environment, and personal workwhy innovations fail 7relationships. in the systems view, the objective has become the maintenance and preservation of the arrangement of roles or relationships created by theproduction subsystems. the fundamental dynamic here is the maintenanceof cohesiveness, solidarity, or a sense of common fate, that is, the organization’s social environment, among system members (p. 419). accordingly, the systems view of sf is focused on system maintenance to promote organizational goal achievement, stability, adaptability, and survival. the goal of management is to ensure that the organization is orderlyand integrated so that input–output relationships and labor productivity aremaximized. in this environment, accounting systems and practices havetechnical roles to play in the appraisal, evaluation, and rewarding ofemployees ( sisaye, 1997 ). the sf systems process operates indeﬁnitely and involves modiﬁcation and/or experimentation to improve existing systems, technologies, productsand services on a continuous basis ( lant & mezias, 1992 ;mezias & glynn, 1993). given the sf emphasis on operating efﬁciency and effectiveness, it is logical that organizations characterized as sf follow a reactive/adaptivestrategy to change that focuses on incremental, quick-ﬁx, solutions ratherthan on a long-term solution. sf utilizes a step-by-step incremental strategyto institute modiﬁcations and small-scale improvements to correct problems without major organizational commitment in technical, ﬁnancial, and human resources ( mezias & glynn, 1993 ). accordingly, the sf approach to organizational learning is single-loop (incremental). it legitimizes double-loop (radical) learning as long as the outcomes of the process support thestability and maintenance of the social systems. 1.3.2. the conﬂict-radical (cr) theoretical approach the cr approach advocates radical and proactive innovation strategies toalter the organizational learning systems. the strategy is to experiment withor to explore new assumptions, ideas, and novel approaches that result inmajor breakthroughs in learning that have positive effects on society(mezias & glynn, 1993 ). it involves the development of new paradigms and perspectives in educational methodologies to institute radical changes. it isbased on re-orientation learning, focusing on anticipating and responding to environmental changes to understand the consequential impact of learning in organizations and society ( metzger & phillips, 1991 ). in general, the cr approach follows planned innovation strategies of organizational growthand transformational development ( sisaye, 2001 ).organizational learning and process innovations 8despite chaotic appearance of this view, the cr learning strategy focuses on orderly double-loop, second-order learning and a well-planned imaginative and creative change approach. metzger and phillips (1991) have suggested that double-loop learning has the potential to re-orient and modify the institutional assumptions of corporations and society and re-deﬁne the educational systems programs to focus on organizationalchange and development. the cr approach views learning and innovationsin terms of altering existing social contractual relationships among societalmembers. the consequential approach follows a radical approach thatadvances individual and institutional integrity, systemic and integrativethinking, to understand the consequences of management actions, and, ifnecessary, to be able to take corrective measures to avoid social, ecological, and environmental crises ( sisaye, 2011 ). the cr approach follows a proactive, double-loop learning approach to organizational learning. 1.4. organizational learning: single and double loop organizational learning has been viewed as a source of competitive advantage. it helps organizations to develop and adopt innovation strategies that enableorganizations to respond effectively to changes in their institutional environ-ments to improve their performance. organizational learning has been viewedas entailing ‘‘new insights and modiﬁed behavior. [it] occurs through sharedinsights, knowledge, and mental models’’ ( stata, 1989, p. 64 ). researchers from diverse disciplines: sociology, organizational behavior, to mention a few ofthem, have argued that an organization’s effective utilization of innovations is enabled primarily by an appropriate learning strategy ( attewell, 1992 ; fichman & kemerer, 1997 ;lant & mezias, 1992 ;mezias & glynn, 1993 ; schulz 2001 ). learning increases the organization’s ability to adapt to its changing competitive environment and successfully implement appropriate strategic changes intended to improve its performance ( lopez, peon, & ordas, 2005;windrum, 2001 ). thus, both the adoption and diffusion of innovations and organizational learning are important to organizations confronted with theneed to innovate to improve long-term performance ( sandberg, 2007 ). lumpkin and lichtenstein (2005) have identiﬁed three approaches to organizational learning: behavioral, cognitive, and action. behavioral learn-ing deals with the capacity of organizational processes, structures and systemsto support learning (pp. 453–454). cognitive learning, on the contrary, focuseswhy innovations fail 9on individuals’ capacity to change their mental cognition and abilities to acquire, assemble, and interpret knowledge (pp. 454–455). action learningaddresses the application, practicality, and effectiveness of acquired knowl-edge in solving problems. it has implications for an improvement in an organization’s performance. theargyris and schon (1978) classiﬁcation of learning into single- and double-loop is based on action learning and the impact learning has as incremental (single-loop) or radical (double-loop) change. action learningenables individuals to be reﬂective, ask questions, increase their willingness touncover problems, discontinue extant routines that hinder performance, andtake appropriate actions that impact the organization at large. it changespatterns and styles of communication and interaction among members. argyris and schon (1978) suggested that, in action learning, there is openness and willingness to take competitive advantage in innovations and productiv- ity (pp. 455–457). members exchange ideas, commit themselves to problem-solving, and adapt to the new learning environment. there is discovery,awareness, and cooperation in creating synergies of the new knowledge thatenhances the organization’s capabilities and competencies. organizational learning, thus deals with developing knowledge and enabling organizations to become competitive to adapt to their environment. for example, in marketing, kandemir and hult (2005) suggested that learning broadens the scope of organizational market orientation to achieve a competitive advantage. it inﬂuences the culture and orientations thatorganizations have toward their customers. organizations that have culturewith innovative systems orientations are customer-oriented in terms of theirproducts and services. learning enables multinational corporations tocompete globally by acquiring knowledge that is unique, develop newinsights and have experiences that help them adjust to the international market environment. the global market is competitive and ﬁrms need new technological innovations, and products to meet consumers’ demands andneeds. according to vera and crossman (2004) , organizational learning can become a source of competitive advantage that drives the future strategicdirection of an organization for renewal. when learning is institutionalized, itbecomes a part of the operating activities of the organization, and eventuallyis embedded in policies, procedures and daily routines (pp. 222–225). learning organizations are able to differentiate themselves from others by their ability to use their knowledge to obtain a relative advantage over theircompetitors. this entails management knowledge. in strategic learning, itrefers to the ability of top management to use accumulated knowledge toorganizational learning and process innovations 10improve and advance organizational performance vis-a-vis their competi- tors. thus, strategic learning involves the use of experts with diversebackgrounds to gather, collect, interpret and analyze data for decisions thatplace the organization at a competitive advantage ( thomas, sussman, & henderson, 2001, pp. 331–342 ).bapuji and crossan (2004) suggested that the strategies of organizations shape learning and context to align learningwith environmental changes. thus, the structure (which is the context)shapes the learning process and its outcomes (p. 408). in organizational behavior literature, organizational learning is deﬁned as the study of how organizations adapt to new and changing environmentsthrough the adoption and integration of new and innovative practices(seedavenport, 1993 ). thus, in addition to adoption, learning is also related to diffusion analysis in sociology, which studies how innovations aredisseminated across a particular population, that is, similar group ( rogers, 1971, 1995 ;rogers & shoemaker, 1971 ) and within an organization (sandberg, 2007 ). in this book we apply the organizational learning framework to the management accounting literature to understand betterwhy management accounting innovations succeed or fail in organizations. when an organization introduces an innovation, the nature and effect of that innovation will be determined by the learning strategy that the organization adopts. this choice will inﬂuence the magnitude of the organization’s change in terms of extent and scope . when process innovation is supported by organizational learning, it facilitates diffusion and adoption. stata (1989) viewed organizational learning as a competitive advantage for organizationsable to respond quickly to changes in their institutional environments (p. 64). inother words, to respond to competitive changes, organizations cannoteffectively utilize process innovations without a well-developed learningstrategy ( lant & mezias, 1992 ;mezias & glynn, 1993 ;porter, 1980 ). the learning strategy follows a two-stage process: single-loop and double-loop learning ( argyris & schon, 1978 ). we have deﬁned single-loop learning in terms of incremental change, and double-loop learning as radical change. 1.4.1. single-loop learning the objective of single-loop learning is to ﬁnd new ways and methods toaccelerate organizational learning and improvements. single-loop learningis intended to ﬁnd better ways of doing things already being done. thesechanges can occur in various ways. some organizations change through trialwhy innovations fail 11and error; others change by adopting innovations that have been successful elsewhere. the rationale for adopting an innovation in such cases is thecost–beneﬁt analysis. this is the essence of single-loop learning. the focus of the single-loop learning pedagogy is on detection of errors/ inefﬁciencies and on their correction within the operations of theorganization to improve its performance, strategy, and systems. learningis designed to improve existing sets of activities within the organization andto modify their functionality and adaptation to changes to maintain thestability of the system. thus, the adaptation process allows organizations tomake incremental changes to improve performance. in general, incremental changes are ‘‘generated through continuous improvement processes, are more clearly deﬁned and better understood than transformative changes’’ ( dibella, 2007, p. 237 ). accordingly, there are fewer unknowns because the processes being adjusted or redesigned are not new. there is a greater likelihood that changes are understood andoutcomes known. resource expenditures required by design are limited withfew unintended consequences. 1.4.2. double-loop learning double-loop learning occurs when an organization is able to ‘‘detect andcorrect errors in the operating norms’’ and activities of the organization(van de ven, 1986, p. 603 ). double-loop learning allows an organization to institute new norms and procedures to transform organizational activities. itis a second-order learning that leads to re-orientation ( lant & mezias, 1992), discontinuous change, and development of new paradigms to do things differently than in the past. discontinuous change usually arises from changes in markets, technol- ogy, and competitive forces. there will be unanticipated interruptions anddisruptions in operations. because these discontinuous changes requiresigniﬁcantly different adaptive strategies and approaches to managementorganization activities, organizations plan ahead to address them. bessant (2005) noted that, when organizations face problems that are beyond their current domain or ‘‘normal operating conditions,’’ the viablealternative approach for addressing them is through discontinuous innovation. ‘‘discontinuous can take a number of forms – for example a step change in technological development, the emergence of a totally newmarket or a dramatic shift in the political/regulatory environment’’ (p. 37).these changes happen most often to organizations operating in unstableorganizational learning and process innovations 12conditions that give rise to discontinuous change. bessant (2005) referred to discontinuous innovation as ‘‘generative’’ or ‘‘double-loop’’ learning that involved the development of new behaviors that, over time, eventuallybecome embedded into routines (p. 38). double-loop learning occurs when an organization moves from simply performing what they are doing better by referring to rules and procedures(single-loop) to improve their operations by constructively challengingcurrent routines and activities. organizations develop alternative assump-tions, ideas, and resources to replace old rules even if they are functional.they will test new ideas to bring novel approaches and methods to theconduct of their operations and business. double-loop learning also generates new technologies that lead to major changes in knowledge and activities within organizations. if double-looplearning is to become robust and advance the organizational learningprocess, it can do so by identifying, suggesting potential solutions, andeliminating unsuccessful solutions. as a result of this process, ‘‘errors areeliminated by reﬂecting on mismatches between tentative solutions triedand expected outcomes’’ ( blackman, connelly, & henderson, 2004, p. 19 ). in other words, there is reﬂective learning when new solutions developto solve existing errors/problems (e.g., see rowe, birnberg, & shields, 2008). thus, double-loop learning questions existing operational activities to bring about radical changes that will alter and change these activities.strategies, missions, and systems are altered to bring dynamic changes in theorganization work activities and processes so that they become ﬂexible andadaptable to the changing environment. organizations acquire a new knowledge base and competencies that will enable them to interact and manage the external environment. they have acquired the knowledge required to utilize resources that are obtained either internally and/or externally. managing the ﬂow of information andintegration of a different knowledge base increases the capability oforganizations to manage resources effectively. double-loop learning is most likely to occur when organizations face a dynamic environment with continuous changes in both the external andenvironmental sectors. in these conditions, a double-loop learning strategy,particularly one that involves paradigm changes, is necessary to sustain and improve organizational performance. double-loop learning is also required when an organization accustomed to an incremental (single-loop learning)environment is faced with a discontinuous change in its externalenvironment (e.g., see rowe et al., 2008 ).why innovations fail 13jamali (2005) suggested that organizations with matrix and decentralized structures, where teams manage uncertainties through innovations and change, are best equipped to handle changes in both their external andtheir internal environments (pp. 107–109). in general, organizations with decentralized structures encourage free ﬂow of communication and informa- tion exchange leading to ongoing changes in organizational assumptions andbehaviors. it is possible that these developments of double-loop learning mayfoster and ease paradigm changes in an organization’s culture, behavior, andmode of operations. van haaften (2007) argued that ‘‘paradigm change can be represented in terms of judgment criteria’’ that represent conceptual change. theseconceptual changes have three components or basic structures (or steps). first, there is a ‘‘logical reconstruction of these constructive processes’’ to understand what the speciﬁc conceptual changes are (p. 209). second, therehave to be individuals or persons who accept these changes and then areinvolved in advancing them. third, these concepts must lend themselves tostructural analysis by others. van haaften (2007) advances kuhn’s (1970) paradigm change by suggesting that it implied the rejection of existing accepted judgment(s), or,in newton’s case, the view of the universe. for kuhn, accepting ‘‘einstein’’ by deﬁnition ‘‘implies rejecting newton,’’ and ‘‘this is what makes it a paradigm change.’’ accordingly, this involves structurally replacing ‘‘the initialjudgment criterion’’ by new ones ( van haaften, 2007, p. 211 ). taylor (2005) gave an example of a paradigm shift in international migration management by the united states, canada, australia, and new zealand in the1990s where migration in limited form and controlled operation was acceptedby third world countries to manage migration through a global migration andlabor protection program. both van haaften (2007) and taylor (2005) perceived paradigm change as involving both structural and conceptualchanges in organizational learning and innovations. whether learning involves the detection of errors, the development of new methods to solve existing problems, or a complete overhaul of thesystem of operations with new behaviors and modes of operations involvingparadigm changes, organizational learning, whether single-loop (incremen-tal), and/or double-loop (radical) is necessary to improve organizationalperformance. accordingly, both single- and double-loop learning strategies shape both technological and administrative innovations. in sf and cr frameworks, both learning approaches are exempliﬁed within the context ofadoption and diffusion of technological innovations.organizational learning and process innovations 141.5. adoption and diffusion issues related to sf- and cr-based technological innovations both sf and cr frameworks assume that the learning process starts with adoption of technological changes that affect production relations and economic organizations in society. the learning process is shaped by organizational power and structures, conﬂictual and coalition-based relation-ships, individual goals, social order, and distribution of resources. learningand innovations have the potential to alter existing political power structuresin the organization if they are adopted by those that are not part of thecoalition. in other words, there are risks and uncertainties associated withlearning that are mostly related to technological innovations, which couldresult in delays in adoption, resulting from power conﬂicts among coalition members. such delays in adoption makes the result of the ‘‘technologically improved product’’ short-lived and obsolete ( butler, 1988, p. 20 ). while risks and uncertainties explain delays in adoption of innovations, differences in early and late adoption may be attributed to factors related tocohesion and structural arrangements that deﬁne individual and socialrelationships as well as timing differences in investment decisions. in a studyof medical innovation, burt (1987) discovered that sf attributes of physical proximity, structural equivalence, friendliness, and network relationships caused social contagion of diffusion of innovation. structural equivalence indicated that in medical innovations, physicians adopted new formulations,for example, prescription drugs, when their peers in the medical hierarchyprofession adopted these innovations. soete and turner (1984) noted that costs and resource outlays associated with innovations are the principal reasons for delays in innovationinvestments. sf-based economic assumptions stress return on investmentand cost-saving mechanisms when making investments in technological innovations. it is assumed that organizations make different decisions about investment choices: when to adopt, how to seek the most proﬁtable invest-ment technique, where to invest, how to determine the cost of new invest-ments, and obtain more information about time, costs, and alternatives.it may involve a rational decision to delay action until all the relevantinformation about other organizations’ experiences is obtained ( soete & turner, 1984, p. 615 ). to this effect, witt (1997) expressed the economic risks associated with early adoption decisions as follows: ‘‘the agents who adopted the newwhy innovations fail 15technology or variant at an early stage would have to bear a negative total relative beneﬁt resulting from the initial network diseconomies. in contrast,those who adopt at a time when the diseconomies have already turned intonetwork economies would proﬁt from the ‘investments’ of the early adopters’’’ (p. 769). while some organizations learn the success of technological innovation through trial and error, other organizations have a policy of adopting and imitating only those innovations that have already proven to be successful.the economic rationale behind this decision is that the adoption ofinnovation ‘‘will increase a ﬁrm’s present value above the pre-innovationlevel’’ ( jensen, 1983, p. 162 ). see also jensen (2001) . while it is true that innovations born through trial and error succeed, there are structural, cultural, and power distributions as well as differential factors that hinder adoption and diffusion of innovations, thereby contributing to innovationslag. in the case of an innovation that has positive economic beneﬁts to theorganization , there may still be individuals/groups that lose resources, power, etc. these individuals/groups may beneﬁt from and, therefore, preferthe status quote or an alternative innovation. 1.6. adoption–diffusion and innovation lag in general, organizational lag refers to the relative differences in the degreeby which organizations adopt technical and/or administrative innovations(damanpour & evan, 1984, p. 394 ). there are individual, group, and organizational differences that contribute to innovation lag. whileindividual factors deal with personality, behavior, and attitudinal con-straints, organizational factors are more general and address institutional environmental factors that affect innovations. divisional structures and arrangements inﬂuence the degree and success of innovations in organiza-tions. these characteristics explain whether or not there is an innovation lagin organizations. for example, administrative innovations face organiza-tional constraints. bureaucratic procedures in operating systems ofmechanistic structures and difﬁculties in establishing cost-beneﬁt linkagesin administrative innovations have contributed to innovation lag. account-ing control systems as part of administrative operating systems have experienced innovation lag over the years. however, recent developments in information technology (it) have contributed to incremental changesin accounting, recording, and reporting of production and quality costs inbusiness and manufacturing organizations.organizational learning and process innovations 16in addition to organizational type, divisional structures, work arrange- ments, as well as individual and group characteristics, all inﬂuence innovation behavior and the degree to which innovation can impactorganizational performance. information and communication are consid- ered critical in the dissemination of innovation and in the creation of adoption lag. as noted earlier, some ( jamali 2005 ) believe that a matrix organizational structure facilitates the adoption of innovations. rogers (1971) androgers and shoemaker (1971) concluded that the ﬂow of innovation information and technological know-how are important in thediffusion process of innovation. in particular, they stressed the level ofcontact between originators and adopters, personality characteristicsof early adopters, the nature of the ﬂow of information, and the choice of communication channels as key factors which affect the degree and speed of the adoption process. they suggested that the best strategy to accelerate thediffusion process is through the identiﬁcation and dissemination ofinnovation by inﬂuential early adopters (opinion leaders referred to as‘‘champions’’). once they are identiﬁed, the next step is to provide themwith the support they need to inﬂuence others (followers) to imitate themand adopt the innovation. failure to target inﬂuential early adopters and lack of appropriate means of communication could reduce the demand for innovation information,resulting in innovation lag. because it creates obstacles to adoption, it canbe referred to as an adoption lag. in essence, what rogers and shoemaker (1971) are suggesting is comparable to the view of grattet, jenness, and curry (1998) who viewed ‘‘diffusion as a process involving the homo- genization of cultural practices and policy forms’’ (p. 288). in other words,diffusion involves cultural assimilation and the sharing of norms and valueswithin the population of the targeted organization. if organizations do not have the necessary resources, cultures, and institutional structures, they will not be able to design and implement the adoption and diffusion of processinnovations successfully. the lack of homogenization of ideas, views, values,beliefs, norms and, in general, shared culture create innovation lag. because management control systems inﬂuence decisions regarding organizational power distribution, and resources allocation ( sisaye, 1999 ), they can affect the learning strategies pursued to design and implementprocess innovations. we develop a theoretical framework integrating theories of adoption–diffusion and organization. we use adoption–diffusion theory to describe the process whereby the innovation is planned andimplemented. we use the theory of argyris (1992) ,argyris and schon (1978, 1996) regarding organizational learning to describe the type ofwhy innovations fail 17learning: single-loop or double-loop, required by the innovation. finally, we utilize the work of atwell (1992) and of schultz (2001) on organizational learning, of rogers (1971, 1995) and of sandberg (2007) on adoption and diffusion theories to identify and understand the potential pitfalls faced by management in implementing accounting innovations. we argue that the two types of organizational learning: the sf (single- loop) or the cr (double-loop) approaches have an effect on the modes of adoption and diffusion of process innovation strategies. this is discussed inchapter 2.organizational learning and process innovations 18chapter 2 adoption and diffusion of process innovations inmanagement accounting systems the adoption and diffusion of process innovation has been applied in a wide variety of contexts in sociology and organizational behavior ( rogers, 1971, 1995;rogers & shoemaker, 1971 ). it has been applied to study the transfer of information technology (it), the adoption of new innovative practices,and the use of change agents to communicate innovative methods toorganization members. in organizational behavior literature, adoption hasfocused on studying initiation and implementation, while diffusion has elaborated on the dissemination of administrative and technological innovations as part of organizational change and transformation processes. davenport (1993) extended diffusion analysis to study the successful adoption of new it by an organization. we have incorporated davenport’s (1993) process innovation research on the sociology of adoption and diffusion research in process innovations within the management accountingliterature. we provide a contingency framework for understanding howadoption and diffusion of process innovations can be utilized to explain the success and/or failures of management accounting innovations. researchers in organizational sociology, management, and product marketing for a long time have been interested in process innovation and diffusion theories. recent applications of those theories to managementaccounting innovations, such as abc, have generated signiﬁcant changes inaccounting theory and practice (see anderson, 1995 ;anderson & young, 1999;argyris & kaplan, 1994 ;gosselin, 1997 ;jones & dugdale, 2002 ). however, as yet, there is no integrative framework with which to study the process of accounting innovations in organizations. 192.1. approaches to innovation researchers in the social sciences have studied the process by which new ideas are adopted (implemented) and how acceptance is generated among those charged with accepting and implementing an innovation. sociology, in particular, has developed an extensive literature on diffusion analysis whichexamines how innovations are diffused (see coleman, katz, & menzel, 1966;leagans & loomis, 1971 ;rogers, 1971 ;rogers & shoemaker, 1971 ). while many of these studies dealt with the adoption and diffusion of a newproduct, for example, seed corn or drugs, the same analysis has been appliedto process innovations, that is, system and organizational change. process innovation has been deﬁned as an intentional attempt to bring change and/or new methods of arranging work structures, processes orprocedures in organizations, as well as changes in individual and groupbehaviors and roles ( damanpour, 1987 ;west & farr, 1989 ). organizations adopt process innovations for different reasons. typically the reasons focuson the need to maintain or improve the performance of the organization ora sub-unit and/or to respond to changes in the organization’s externalenvironment. process innovation can be a discrete response to a particularchange in the competitive environment or it can be ongoing, that is, evolving over a period of time, because of either internal or external change. in management accounting, process innovations include the introduction ofquality improvement programs and changes in management accounting,reporting, and control systems. it is important to remember that processinnovations are usually introduced within existing organizations whosecultures, domains, and boundaries may affect and be affected by theinnovation. this can facilitate or inhibit the adoption and implementationof the process innovation. during the last decade of the 20th century, various process innovations occurred in business organizations that either involved accounting directly,for example, abc, or affected the accounting function indirectly, forexample, just-in-time technology (jit), total quality management (tqm),or business process reengineering (bpr). these innovations have met withvarying levels of success ( ittner & larcker, 1998 ). for obvious reasons the failure of an innovation to be successfully implemented has raised questions.various reasons have been offered for these failures. one possible explanation suggests the cause of the failure is in the implementation process rather than in the innovation itself. the adoption process was ﬂawedin a way that resulted in the innovation being rejected. as brunsson (1982) noted, there is a difference between the act of choosing the best course oforganizational learning and process innovations 20action (decision making) and the process of implementing that course of action (gaining its acceptance). the former typically relies on a form of cost–beneﬁt analysis. the latter is a more political process. it may not always bepolitically feasible to implement the ‘‘best’’ course of action. implementa- tion involves coalition formation in support of the innovation ( cyert & march, 1963 ;pfeffer, 1992 ). thus a successful innovation requires that the opinion leaders championing the innovation have both a desirable innovation and an appropriate plan to gain its acceptance. only then canthey implement and diffuse it. there is an extensive literature in process innovation in sociology, which examines how innovations are adopted and diffused (see coleman et al., 1966;leagans & loomis, 1971 ;rogers, 1971 ;rogers & shoemaker, 1971 ). the adoption of many technological innovations may be limited by theimplementation costs, that is, research and development (r&d), or by legalexigencies such as patents and regulatory requirements. technologicalinnovations usually are driven by demand, and undertaking a particulartechnological innovation is motivated by proﬁt potential or loss avoidance. organizational sociology literature suggests that adopters of technical innovations can be divided into two groups: early and late. early adoptersare few in number and usually include organizations that follow a pros- pector strategy or are industry leaders. these are the organizations whose leaders are willing to take the risks that are associated with the experi-mentation with new technologies or systems. once the early adopters havedemonstrated the feasibility and desirability of an innovation, many otherswill follow. thus, the number of late adopters will vastly outnumber that ofearly adopters. researchers describe innovations as being driven by either supply or demand. demand driven refers to the development of innovations to meet a need/demand already identiﬁed by potential adopters. they can be described as individuals/organizations already in search of a solution(innovation). in contrast, supply driven innovations are those where a newinnovation leads to the potential adopters to identify a need of which theywere previously unaware. unlike technical innovations that often aredemand driven, management accounting innovations are largely driven bysupply. the adoption of these innovations is based on their availability fromvarious sources, for example, academics, consulting organizations, and those that perform the necessary r&d to recommend the preliminary adoption of the innovation. early adopting organizations are either incooperation with the developer or on their own, have experimented with thenew administrative system.adoption and diffusion of process innovations in management accounting 21the need for supply driven innovations is harder to demonstrate than the typical demand driven innovation for which a need already has been identiﬁed. thus, they are potentially riskier. to minimize the possibility ofunanticipated adverse consequences from the still untested innovations, the early adoption of these innovations are often undertaken as a two stage process. initially the organization ‘‘experiments’’ with the innovation in asmall segment, for example, a subunit, of the organization. the success ofthese initial adopters serves to popularize the innovation that results in thesecond stage: acceptance, implementations, and subsequent disseminationthroughout the organization. should it fail in its initial trial, theorganizations (and the advocates of early adoption) have minimized theirlosses. in sociology literature, these two stages of in the implementation of process innovations are labeled adoption and diffusion. in the subsequentsections we apply a contingency framework to study the sociology ofadoption and diffusion of innovations in complex organizations. we use thecontingency framework to study these two stages of innovations: adoptionand diffusion within management accounting contexts as described in sisaye and birnberg (2010b) . 2.1.1. stage 1: adoption of innovation there is a hierarchy of innovations in adoption decisions. this hierarchyemanates from the fact that, in adoption, there is a systematic process forthe acquisition and synthesis of knowledge. in adoption, cognitiveprocessing, according to gatingon and robertson (1985) , has a ‘‘hierarchy of effects model’’ because the adoption process represents ‘‘awareness, knowledge, attitude formation, trial, and adoption’’ (p. 854). while cognition is important for individual adopters; the adoption process isdifferent for groups, networks and organizations, in that it goes beyondspeciﬁc innovations involving social and economic processes withinorganizations, and, in some instances, reﬂects local and national changes.in other words, the adoption of an innovation may include not onlyindividuals and groups; it may involve organizations and also nations.adoption occurs at the national level, when, for example, the adoption of social change includes political reforms affecting regions, states, political parties, or national groups. wejnert (2002) discussed characteristics of innovations that are speciﬁc to adopters. she identiﬁed several factors including the adopters’ familiarityorganizational learning and process innovations 22with the innovation, status and socioeconomic circumstances, relative position and adopter’s personality within the network or group. wejnert (2002) suggested that organizations or groups ‘‘adopt innovations with many private, environmental consequences (that change the innovators’ environment)’’ (p. 303). innovations are spread through contact or institutional arrangements where ‘‘ﬁrms belonging to the same professionalorganizations tended to adopt similar management styles’’ (p. 303).membership in the same association (weak ties) encourages the adoptionof generic management styles. wejnert (2002) suggested that new or novel innovations that are widely popularized via the media, personal contacts, expertise, or networks areperceived as having fewer risks of being adopted. however, in these cases, larger established organizations can generally better able to take risks associated with innovations because of the greater availability of slackresources. the position of the actor advocating/supporting the innovation aswell as characteristics related to the actor’s centrality of position within groups,networks, or an organizational network also serve as sources of inﬂuence thatfacilitate the adoption of innovations ( wejnert, 2002, pp. 303–306 ). accordingly, when innovations that are promoted by inﬂuential opinion leaders, who are accepted within the organization and the community, are diffused and adopted, they can have positive consequences for the adopters. although, the decision to adopt is voluntary, it can be promoted by othersusing education and persuasion through a stage-ordered or gradual phaseapproach. in this context, dearing (2009) identiﬁed the degree to which adoption of readiness or stages of change differ among targeted popula-tions. the innovators are the ﬁrst to adopt, then, early adopters; lateadopters who constitute the majority of the population follow. wheninnovations are adopted by highly inﬂuential opinion leaders accompanied by change agents, the communication of the innovation becomes effective, and thus increases the likelihood of its adoption by others whose evaluationof the innovation is strongly inﬂuenced by these opinion leaders. in thissetting later adopters imitate those preceding them only after theyare convincedthat it is in their interest to adopt the innovation. cultures, social groups,and power structures also inﬂuence the diffusion process (pp. 506–509). while most of the literature in process innovations refers to rogers (1995) for his noted framework in diffusion of innovations, his name has not been associated with the adoption process. dearing (2009) further elaborated rogers’ (1995) approaches to include decisions to adopt innovations. dearing (2009) argued that the adoption process is inﬂuenced by factors related to the ‘‘ relative advantage ,’’ and ‘‘ simplicity’’ of the innovation, andadoption and diffusion of process innovations in management accounting 23its ‘‘compatibility ’’ with existing individuals, groups, organization norms, and cultures. characteristics associated with ‘‘ observability andtrialiability ’’ facilitate the adoption process because they make its evaluation easier. in addition, while risks mitigate the decision to adopt, the question of ‘‘proﬁtability ’’ or cost–beneﬁt analysis provides an economic rationale for the adoption decision. accordingly, an experiment to demonstrate theinnovation increases its likelihood of acceptance (pp. 509–510. dearing’srogers’ italics). in organization management literature, these adoptioncharacteristics have been associated with technical rather than adminis-trative innovations. literature regarding the adoption of innovation has largely concentrated on internal characteristics of an organization and on external factors that created the conditions appropriate for adoption decisions. attewell (1992) speciﬁcally expanded rogers’ (1971) concern for the causes of the diffusion process by focusing on the adopters. he identiﬁed four factors that affect the adoption decision of individuals or organizations: ﬁrm size, ﬁrmproﬁtability, innovation champions, and organizational attributes. the ﬁrstfactor, ﬁrm size, suggests that larger ﬁrms have greater opportunities toinnovate than small ﬁrms. the second factor, proﬁtability, indicates that amore proﬁtable ﬁrm has greater resources and capabilities to undertake innovations. the third factor, the presence of potential innovation champions, means that there are individuals in the organization who aremotivated to persuade others to adopt a particular innovation. the last factor refers to internal and environmental attributes of an organization. these are related to divisional autonomy, degree of functionalspecialization/expertise, and centralization versus decentralization of thedecision-making process regarding adoption ( daft, 1978 ;perrow, 1986 ;scott, 1987). in general, organizational/divisional bureaucratic structures affect innovation outcomes. in centralized organizations that adopt accountinginnovations, the likelihood that these innovations will be successfullyimplemented is higher than in decentralized and less formal organizations. indecentralized organizations, individuals and/or units have the autonomy andﬂexibility to slow down or abandon accounting innovation implementation ifthey feel it is detrimental to their divisional interests (see ansari & euske, 1987 ; brunsson, 1982 ). while in accounting decentralization and differentiated structures have a signiﬁcant impact on the decision whether or not to adopt an innovation, gosselin (1997) documented a case where a centralized structure was needed to support the successful implementation of abc’s adoption. we add a ﬁfth and sixth factor to the four factors outlined by attewell (1992) : ﬁfth, the congruence between the innovation prospects and theorganizational learning and process innovations 24organization’s competitive strategy and environment; sixth, the degree of management’s support for the innovation intended to institute managementaccounting reporting changes within the organization. 2.1.1.1. congruency between the organization’s competitive strategy and environmentthe ﬁfth factor addresses the prevalence of competition, and the consistencyof the organization’s decision to undertake an innovation with its strategy,for example, sustained efforts to improve the operating efﬁciency of theorganization. according to barnett and hansen (1996) , the organization’s competition or rival ﬁrms often are constraints on the organization’sbehavior. they indicate that the nature of an organization’s competition changes when its cohort of rivals that share the same strategic interactions changes. when this occurs, the organization is then ‘‘confronted with newrivals that do not share the organization’s co-evolutionary history’’ (p. 143;see also barnett & carroll, 1987 ). the organization’s new rivals bring new constraints and change the dynamics of its competition. this createsopportunities for organizations to adopt innovation strategies related toorganizational development (od) and/or transformation (ot). competitive strategy thus becomes a process through which a ﬁrm utilizes its resources or competencies to maximize environmental opportunities,while at the same time it minimizes potential threats raised by the environ-ment ( porter, 1980 ). the interaction between strategy and structure inﬂuences the ability of the organization to adapt to environmental changes.according to lant and mezias (1992) , ‘‘organizations with an adaptive strategy search for information that reveals the relationship betweenorganizational characteristics and performance. that is, they determinewhich mix of organizational characteristics is associated with the highest performance and adopt those characteristics’’ (p. 55). in other words, performance is dependent on whether or not there exists a close relationshipbetween current environmental changes and the ability of the organizationto handle and process these changes ( porter, 1980, 1985 ). process innovation strategies that are transformational in scope become the main core competencies for organizations in a high competitiveenvironment. their successes depend on whether or not they have theability to sustain continuous change. to remain competitive, for example, manufacturing organizations that follow incremental intervention strategies ‘‘adopt’’ abc. for example, abc becomes the appropriate technicalinnovation approach for cost reduction strategies to attain improvedorganizational performance ( ittner, lanen, & larcker, 2002 ).adoption and diffusion of process innovations in management accounting 25however, researchers have also examined the potential interaction, that is, the ‘‘ﬁt,’’ between innovation and the organization’s competitive strategy (baptista, 1999 ;butler, 1988 ;gort & will, 1986 ;jensen, 1983, 2001 ;porter, 1980, 1985 ;schroeder, 1990 ). thus, a ﬁrm that follows a low cost producer (incremental) strategy would be more receptive to abc or jit than one thatfollows a (transformational) strategy that stresses product innovation, aswell as r&d. accordingly, adoptions of technical management accountinginnovations follow strategies that are assumed to meet cost-beneﬁt tests(attewell, 1992 ;jensen, 1983, 2001 ). the adoption of innovations in many private and public organizations has been shaped by cost considerations. for example, lapsley and wright (2004) noted that the adoption of innovations in governmental organiza- tions often is the result of budgetary pressures. this has been the case inhealth care organizations that have been forced to reduce costs in responseto declining government levels of reimbursement of health care costs. theyreported that adoption of innovations by local authorities and health carecenters were in response to central government initiatives and mandates forcost control reform (pp. 361, 370). strange and soule (1998) referred to innovations in business management approaches or models as ‘‘cycles of protest and innovation.’’ these innovations bring protest and opposition at different levels by different groups. there are tensions, support, and competition when these ideas arespread throughout the organization. they cited ‘‘cycles of technological andmanagerial innovation’’ in business organizations pursued by managementto transform them. several strategies, including tqm and reengineering,were advocated by management consultants and agents ‘‘for enhancingquality, speeding innovation, downsizing, and empowering workers. thesemovements spread from ﬁrm to ﬁrm, often following a core-periphery pattern (from big manufacturing and high-tech to services to education and government’’ (p. 280). strange and soule (1998) noted that because of consultants’ competition and advocacy of different types of quality intervention programs, it hasbecome increasingly hard for organizations to distinguish between tqmand reengineering in choosing the implementation of the quality improve-ment program that is best suited for the organization. because of the lack ofcentral organizations, either private or governmental, the diffusion of the best management practices was promoted by consultants, who modiﬁed the approach, depending on client organization. as a result, the lack ofinstitutions or infrastructures to support the innovation made theinnovation faddish, but lasted temporarily ( strang & soule, 1998, p, 281 ).organizational learning and process innovations 262.1.1.2. organizational commitment and management support (buy-in) of the innovationour sixth factor, which is related to the demand for innovation adoptionand implementation, is associated with organizational commitment, that is, top management support of the innovation. managers can serve as agents of change in adoption of innovation throughout the organization when theychampion the innovation. rogers (1971, 1995) suggests that innovation champions can be most effective as sponsors and opinion leaders if theypossess the basic knowledge and understanding of the innovation beingchampioned. jones, herschel, and douglas (2003) highlighted the impor- tance of the champions being well informed about the nature of theinnovation by referring to them as ‘‘knowledge champions’’ who are able to diffuse and transfer innovation within the organization effectively. when knowledge champions accept and commit themselves to accountinginnovations, they will be best able to actively promote and advance theimplementation processes. the study of chrysler and safety-kleen corporations’ implementations of abc as an activity-based management (abm) system ( ness & cucuzza’s, 1995) illustrated the importance of top management’s buy-in of an innovation. the chief operating ofﬁcer (coo) at chrysler and a divisional level manager at safety-kleen bought into abc because they had a basic understanding of both the technical and the administrative components of abc. although theapproaches used by chrysler and safety-kleen differ slightly, both corpora-tions recognized the potential for improved long-term proﬁtability goals byidentifying which products to produce and sell and which customers to serve aswell. at chrysler, the coo followed implementation of abc throughout theorganization, while at safety-kleen, a middle manager initiated the pilotproject at one plant and then used its success to promote acceptance by executives and other plant managers ( ness & cucuzza, 1995 ). to generate employee acceptance, the pilot project approach at safety- kleen allowed managers to drop abc if they found that its adoption did not improve decision making. this transferred the decision making rights tothe managers and permitted them to buy in to the innovation. within arelatively short time, this experiment convinced managers that abc wasinstrumental in reducing costs and in increasing competitiveness andproﬁtability ( ness & cucuzza, 1995 ). at chrysler, the coo was the principal advocate for using abc to transform and restructure the companyby forming ‘‘more ﬂexible, efﬁcient, cross-functional, and process-orientedteams to manage product development and realign distribution bydeveloping closer links and relationships with suppliers and dealers’’adoption and diffusion of process innovations in management accounting 27(p. 130). the successes at both chrysler and safety-kleen reveal that top management acceptance (buy-in) and support are crucial for the adoption ofan innovation. they also support sandberg’s (2007) claim that business performance becomes the main enthusiasm driver (i.e., top management support) for the diffusion of innovations throughout organizations. it is clear then that a critical factor affecting the adoption of an innovation is the congruence of the innovation and the ﬁrm’s competitive strategy. because of increased competition, technological change, andglobalization, organizations have emphasized planned intervention andeffective implementation of innovations ( mcadams, 2005 ). while many authors have viewed innovations primarily as improvements in themanufacturing technological (internal) process, they have also examined innovation’s role in an organization’s competitive (external) strategy (schroeder, 1990 ). as a result, it is widely accepted that an organization can sustain competitive advantage through both imported innovations, forexample, improved manufacturing technological processes, and internallygenerated innovations resulting from the organization’s own r&d of newproducts and processes ( baptista, 1999 ;jensen, 1983, 2001 ). the degree to which organizations and industries adopt innovations and respond to them in the form of investment in new technologies is affected by several factors including market size, demand for new products and services, number of ﬁrms in the industry, and the industry’s life cycle ( butler, 1988 ; gort & will, 1986 ;porter, 1980, 1985 ;schroeder, 1990 ). nevertheless, it is assumed that, in the early stages of an industry life cycle, technologicalinnovations and creative responses to environmental changes are higher thanin later stages. while the rate of adoption is lower at the start of the diffusionprocess, over time, it will gradually spread, in particular as the costs ofadopting an innovation decline and the adoption of the innovation by other ﬁrms provides better understanding of its potential beneﬁts and risks. in most organizations, changes in administrative and management control systems essentially are directly or indirectly the result of adoption of innovations. recent developments in management innovations such asjit, tqm, and bpr have contributed to changes in management accountingsystems, notably abc. adoption and implementation are multidimensionaland are subject to contextual and process factors. anderson and young (1999) discussing abc described contextual factors as internal organizational factors related to individual performance, quality of information system,cost reduction, perceived importance of the unit to the company. theexternal environmental factors are related to competitive environment andenvironmental turbulence that inﬂuence the abc implementation process.organizational learning and process innovations 28on the contrary, process factors related to top management support, commitment from local management and unions, as well as effective internalcommunication, inﬂuenced the outcome evaluation of abc, particularly theuse of abc data for cost reduction and process improvements. thus, it is clear that organizational and contextual factors do inﬂuence the diffusion process of innovations throughout the organization. the literature on the adoption of innovation suggests that certain organizations are better able to successfully adopt innovations because theyhave certain structural attributes that support innovations. moreover, theseorganizations have slack resources and are capable of handling the economicand ﬁnancial risks associated with innovations. they are well positioned toalign their resources and competencies to undertake innovations that are consistent with the organization’s competitive strategy to improve their operating efﬁciencies to produce better products for their customers. theyhave innovation champions who can sponsor and provide guidance of theimplementation of the management accounting innovations throughoutthe organization. 2.1.2. stage 2: diffusion of innovation according to rogers (1971, 1995), diffu sion (dissemination) of information requires that there be an innovation to spread and a targeted population of potential adopters. dissemination requi res means of commun ication that the opinion leaders can use to transmit the information to the potential adopters.the likelihood of adoption depends on the potential beneﬁt as perceivedby individuals, groups, the organization itself, or the community at large who arepotential adopters. while diffusion o ften is viewed as an individual process, networks play roles in this diffusion process, but this presupposes that, in diffusion, there is a ‘‘spread of abstract i deas and concepts, technical information, and actual practices within a social system’’ ( wejnert, 2002, p. 297 ). strang and soule (1998) andwejnert (2002) provided a very extensive review of the literature regarding diffusion of innovations. they stressthe ubiquitousness of the concept. strang and soule (1998) elaborated that ‘‘diffusion refers to the spread of something within a social system. theword ‘spread’ ydenote[s] ﬂow or movement from a source to an adopter, paradigmatically via communication and inﬂuence ythe term ‘practice’ denote[s] the diffusing item, which might be a behavior, strategy, belief,technology, or structure. diffusion is the most general and abstract term wehave for this sort of process, embracing contagion, mimicry, social learning,adoption and diffusion of process innovations in management accounting 29organized dissemination, and other family members. the term ‘diffusion’ ydenote[s] increasing incidence.’’ they attributed that ‘‘something diffuses when more and more people do it’’ (p. 266). moreover, ‘‘diffusion modelsoften treat the adopter as a reﬂective decision maker’’ (p. 267). in most studies, ‘‘the home territory of diffusion is the innovation. innovations are novelyinnovations are also culturally understood as progressive, strengthening the hand of change agents. and since innovations are riskyand uncertain, adopters carefully weigh the experience of others beforeacting’’ (p. 267). accordingly, ‘‘diffusion studies thus generally investigatethe introduction and adoption of an innovation’’ (p. 267). diffusion focuseson ‘‘communication processes and channels, tracing the role of the massmedia, professional change agents, and interpersonal interaction within the adopting community yinternally, the adoption of new practices requires the active efforts of innovation champions and a robust coalition for change’’ (p. 270). mass media, networks, and personal interactions all assistin the diffusion and dissemination processes. if there are change agents whoare educated and respected, they can play important roles in interpersonaldiffusion processes. macro-organizational diffusion research has considereda wide variety of internal factors such as organization’s environment,cultural behavior and organizational sources as being associated with the successful diffusion of innovations. in addition, external factors including market forces, competition and external environmental conditions inﬂuencethe introduction and outcome of diffusion. weinjert (2002) has developed a diffusion framework that integrated internal and external factors as sources that spread diffusion viacommunication from the source to the adopter. this framework has threecomponents: characteristics of innovations, innovators, and environmentcontext ( weinjert, 2002, pp. 298–299 ). the ﬁrst factor, characteristics of innovations, centers on two internal dimensions of the measurement aspectsof the innovation: public vs. private consequences, and beneﬁts versus costof innovations. public consequences address innovations at national or statelevels. by contrast, private consequences are limited to speciﬁc adopter, thatis, groups or collective entities, such as organizations (p. 299). for example,in management accounting, an innovation’s consequences will be at theorganization level – unit/divisions or organization-wide. the second set ofinternal factors are those in which innovators address technical or management styles that are administrative in nature; that is, where the spread of these innovations ‘‘occurs largely due to spatial and temporalcontiguity between a source of a new practice and potential adopter. twoeffects are particularly substantial here: a) spatial effects such as geographicorganizational learning and process innovations 30proximity, interpersonal communication, institutional or individual coer- cion, and b) the pressure of social networks’’ ( wejnert, 2002, p. 300 ). in the last analysis, innovations are adopted when the beneﬁts are greater than thecosts based on cost–beneﬁt analysis. the third external factor, according to wejnert (2002) , is related to the success of diffusion of innovations and depends on the suitability ofenvironmental contexts. ‘‘environment context variables fall into at leastfour subgroups: a) geographic settings, b) societal culture, c) politicalconditions, and d) globalization and uniformity’’ (p. 310). she has suggestedthat the effect of environmental contexts depended on whether or not thediffusion of innovations has private and/or public consequences. whilegeographical settings are relevant for private [consequences], the other three environmental contexts affect both private and public consequences within the context of ‘‘micro- and macro-level actors’’ (p. 310). geographicallocation, that is, proximity, promotes faster spread of the innovation andearlier acceptance by adopters. a societal culture with shared belief systemsof values and norms, as well as religion and ideology, inﬂuences theadoption of innovations. socialization of the innovation to the cultureinvolves the adaptation of new practices or policies with regard toorganizational innovations encourage competition and promote adoption. as for political conditions, legislative policies and/or regulatory forces can inﬂuence innovations, for example, patents ( wejnert, 2002, pp. 311–313 ). thus, diffusion is contextual dependent and occurs within a speciﬁed set of environmental contexts. gattington and robertson (1985) noted that ‘‘diffusion occurs within the boundaries of the social system or marketsegment. the diffusion pattern at the social system level is an outcome of thedistribution of individual adoption decisions. these individual adoptiondecisions are inﬂuenced by personal characteristics, perceived innovation characteristics, personal inﬂuence, and marketing and competitive action’’ (p. 850). accordingly, diffusion ‘‘occurs within a social system that possessesa set of values and norms’’ (p. 857). consequently, the extent of the disse-mination of the innovation depends on its ﬁt or compatibility withorganizational and employees values and norms (p. 857). in this context,the size of the population within the social system is dependent on thedeﬁnition of those potential adopters, for example, percentage of women inthe labor force as opposed to all women. within this context, again, in the area of marketing, economic and legal considerations affect the extent of the marketing system for the diffusion model. system heterogeneity decreasesthe speed of the diffusion whereas system homogeneity facilitates theprocess ( gatingon & robertson, 1985, p. 858 ).adoption and diffusion of process innovations in management accounting 31gatingon and robertson (1985) noted that, in general, ‘‘the diffusion process can be characterized in terms of three dimensions: the rate of diffusion, the pattern of diffusion, and the potential penetration level’’ (p. 858). that is, rate isrelated to the speed, the ‘‘pattern concerns the shape of the diffusion curve’’ which has ‘‘decreasing returns’’ with an ‘‘s-shaped’’ curve. penetration is thus dependent on the size of the market. they argued that, in a market where thereare similar brands, intense competition exists for market penetration whichincreases the rate of diffusion for the product. when there are new productsthat are not tested, diffusion is slower because of the ‘‘increased risk of makingan early decision, purchase is postponed and the diffusion process slows’’(p. 860). in general, when new products are developed and marketed, theperceived innovation characteristics and their relationship and compatibility to a ﬁrm’s market, ‘‘product/company ﬁt,’’ strategy, or culture, affects their speed of diffusion within a social system (p. 861). there are numerous studies in the social science disciplines that have applied diffusion theory and research: sociology, organizational behavior,and marketing among others. diffusion studies are largely based on thedomain of research of speciﬁc disciplines. we have applied organizationalsociological approaches of diffusion research and their relationships tomanagement accounting and innovations systems. within sociological approach, we have focused on macro-level factors as our unit of analysis: groups, teams, divisions/units and/or organizations at large. sociologists who have applied diffusion studies in organizational contexts have elaborated rogers’s (1971) , and rogers and shoemaker’s (1971) suggestion that the ﬂow of innovation information and technological know-how is important in the process of innovation diffusion. this ﬂow isfacilitated by the level of contact between the originators and adopters ofinnovation, personality characteristics of early adopters, nature of the information ﬂow, and the choice of communication channels, all of which are key factors that affect the degree and speed of the adoption process.they stressed that the best strategy for accelerating the diffusion process isthrough identiﬁcation and involvement of opinion leaders who can beinﬂuential early adopters. opinion leaders are referred to as ‘‘champions’’when they sponsor innovations. rogers (1971) androgers and shoemaker (1971) argued that, once a potential innovation has been identiﬁed, potential early adopters must be enlisted. the next step is to provide them with the support and information they need to inﬂuence others (followers) to adopt the innovation. therefore,information and communication are critical to the dissemination ofinnovation and to the length of the time lag between early and late adopters.organizational learning and process innovations 32the diffusion stage of management accounting innovations has been described by management accounting researchers, most notably in the case of abc ( gosselin, 1997 ;malmi, 1999 ). the work of howell and higgins (1990) on the role of champions in the diffusion of adoption can be applied tojones and dugdale’s (2002) description of actors (in other words, champions) and networks that aid the diffusion of abc. as jones and dugdale (2002) noted, the abc diffusion process was facilitated by the prominent status of the actors who advocated (championed) abc as anaccounting innovation, as well as by the support abc received fromindividual and institutional networks within academia, industry, consultingﬁrms, and textbook publishers. they argued that early adopters of abcwere well-established organizations that advocated its utility in the media and provided the impetus for its dissemination to other, potential adopters. the use of abc was rationalized by means of pilot tests and experimenta- tion. jones and dugdale (2002) described abc’s development as a socio- technical expert system embedded in the management of innovations in organizations. as abc was translated from a local accounting procedure to aglobal accounting practice, it was accepted as an expert accounting system,that is, ‘‘a better mousetrap.’’ the abc bandwagon became synonymouswith modern management and innovation and was widely accepted in both the united states and europe (see also malmi, 1999 ). it can be inferred that the initial stage of abc dissemination was facilitated by the centrality of abc networks, that is, the early adopting organizations. abc’s proximity and access to ‘‘suppliers,’’ that is, academics and manage-ment consultants, legitimized and institutionalized its position in bothaccounting theory and practice to the point where the abc bandwagon wasaccepted as a panacea for managing uncertainty in modern organizations(jones & dugdale, 2002 ). in addition to contextual and process factors, organizational learning strategies: both single- and double-loop affect themanagement and implementation contexts of abc. 2.2. organizational learning: single- and double-loop learning within the context of management accounting innovations when an organization introduces an innovation, the consequence of thatinnovation will be affected by the learning strategy that the organization hasadopted. this choice, in turn, will inﬂuence the magnitude of the organization’sadoption and diffusion of process innovations in management accounting 33change as well as its extent and scope. when a process innovation is supported by organizational learning, it facilitates the adoption and diffusion processes.stata (1989) viewed organizational learning as a competitive advantage for those organizations able to respond quickly to changes in their institutional environments. ‘‘organizational learning entails new insights and modiﬁed behavior. [it] occurs through shared insights, knowledge, and mental models’’(p. 64). in other words, organizations cannot effectively utilize a processinnovation without a well developed learning strategy that facilitates theirability to respond to change ( lant & mezias, 1992 ;mezias & glynn, 1993 ). argyris and schon (1978, 1996) have related organizational learning to the process of acquiring new knowledge. they described two types of organiza-tional learning: single-loop and double-loop learning. in general, the organizational behavior literature suggests that organiza- tions have two types of ‘‘innovations.’’ these are incremental (single-loop)and discontinuous (double-loop). incremental changes are adaptations thatoccur within an already established/existing system/framework and requirelimited acquisition of new knowledge, if any, by the adopter. by contrast,discontinuous changes occur when the organization adopts a newsystem/ framework to improve its performance. responding to discontinuouschanges requires signiﬁcant changes in the organization’s activities and, consequently, the acquisition of entirely new knowledge. while the focus of this book is on discontinuous change in the environment (double-looplearning) and the link between innovation and organizational learning, weuse both single- and double-loop learning in our process innovationframework in the context of management accounting systems. 2.2.1. single-loop learning and management accounting innovations single-loop learning is used to describe those accretions in an organization’sknowledge that are intended to ﬁnd better ways (i.e., new knowledge) ofdoing things the organization is doing already ( argyris, 1992 ;argyris & schon, 1978 ). the objective of single-loop learning is to identify and implement new methods designed to improve organizational performancewithin existing systems. as a result, single-loop-based changes are gradualand occur in small increments. the learning process over time leads to a step-by-step accumulation of new skills, techniques, and knowledge that have the potential to contribute to the organization’s implementation anduse of existing systems. it may be a trial-and-error process. knowledge isacquired by the organization as the result of the innovation; that is, whenorganizational learning and process innovations 34formal learning occurs, it can lead to modifying or updating existing knowledge and/or mastery of new skills. in general, the objective of single-loop learning is to ﬁnd new ways and methods to do what we already do better. these goals can be achieved in variously. some organizations change by trial-and-error; others change by adopting innovations that have been successful elsewhere. the rationale foradopting an innovation in these cases is the cost-beneﬁt analysis. this is theessence of single-loop learning. single-loop learning is ubiquitous in organizations. organizations regularly make incremental changes in elements of their managementaccounting systems as they learn more about their environment, forexample, by obtaining better cost estimates of variables already included in a costing system or by adding a dimension to the control system that does not necessarily alter the system. such changes are, in a relative sense,decorative and have limited impact on that portion of the organizationaffected by the change. when incremental changes are observable andsuccessful at the unit level, however, they have the potential to be adoptedby (diffused to) other units and divisions within the organization. 2.2.2. double-loop learning and management accounting innovations double-loop learning is second-order learning that leads to reorientation ofvalues and transformational changes by the organization ( lant & mezias, 1992). it is associated with the presence of a discontinuous change in the organization’s environment ( bessant, 2005 ) and with the development of new paradigms for doing things differently than in the past by means of newapproaches or ways of doing things. double-loop learning occurs when an organization is able to ‘‘detect and correct errors in the operating norms’’ and activities of the organization ( van de ven, 1986, p. 603 ). double-loop learning allows/requires an organization to institute new norms andprocedures to transform organizational activities. unlike single-loop learning, double-loop learning involves radical changes that require the acquisition of signiﬁcant amounts of new knowledge andgreater effort on the part of the organization. this involves identifyingproblems that impact the organization and/or potential changes in the organization’s systems, which will be of beneﬁt to the organization, presenting these problems to the appropriate segment of the organization,convincing it of the efﬁcacy of the innovation and, ultimately, managing theinnovation’s implementation. thus, double-loop learning signiﬁcantlyadoption and diffusion of process innovations in management accounting 35modiﬁes existing operating activities in such a way that the organization must change existing procedures, rules, and modes of operating activitiesaccordingly and replace them with new and fundamentally different methodsof conducting business. in accounting, double-loop learning occurs when an organization has instituted or adopted integrated management control systems, for example, the adoption of bsc as described by kaplan and norton (2001) . theargyris (1992) andargyris and schon (1978) classiﬁcation of double- loop learning parallel radical-transformational learning. radical changeinvolves transformation of the organization’s existing mission, strategy,policies, culture, leadership, and structural arrangements. it requiresemployees to adopt new cultures and approaches to the work environment that may be antithetical to previous behaviors. sandberg (2007) noted that radical innovations require new behaviors that foster enthusiasm among its champions and core team members. because radical innovations create ambiguity and uncertainty in anorganization’s members, sandberg (2007) argues that they require ‘‘champions’’. the champions’ role is to promote change and displaycommitment to it through courage and persistence. these champions utilizeformal and informal networks to communicate the innovations and to sustain enthusiasm for them among employees within the organization. while double-loop learning can be considered to be a continuum, consistent with sandberg (2007) , we describe radical innovations and double-loop learning as dichotomous to reﬂect the nature of the factors leading to the identiﬁcation of the need for change. at one extreme, it has anautonomous-division/unit-level orientation. at the other, it is a systemic-organization-wide strategy. that is, the organizational scope of double-looplearning depends on whether it is autonomous (limited/divisional) or systemic (extensive/organization-wide) for process innovations. when innovations in accounting follow double-loop learning strategies, they haveboth autonomous-technical and systemic-administrative dimensions and areintended to facilitate the implementation of long-term organizational plansand short-term divisional objectives. in management accounting, these processes include a wide variety of administrative systems, for example, organization-wide performance mea-surement and resource allocation systems, as well as information systems development and change. these innovations are designed to improve internal control and accounting systems, organizational structures, admin-istrative processes, and departmental coordination. control and motivationsystems, including cost and budget systems, are examples of administrativeorganizational learning and process innovations 36innovations in accounting systems that support the operating activities of the organization and impact more than one functional area of theorganization. the management accounting literature contains many examples of double-loop learning. ness and cucuzza’s (1995) discussion of organiza- tional changes at chrysler and safety-kleen parallel double-loop learning insystemic innovations. the double-loop approach is illustrated when anautonomous abc system (the innovation) brought about changes in theorganizations that were not only technical, but also dramatic improvementsin administrative reforms. abc gradually evolved from a costing systeminto an activity based management (abm) system and became a systemicinnovation for managing costs, processes, and market strategies. it transformed organizational management systems. for example, chrysler integrated abc as a continuous improvement program. to move the focusof abc from a cost control to a strategic planning system for managingprocesses and market synergies, it was jointly managed by the controllerand the vice-president of continuous improvement programs. at safety-kleen, the strategic approach substituted regular performance measures based on operating budget standards with abc-based perfor-mance measures targeted on industry benchmarks to reward plant managers for controlling unit costs for materials processed in its plants. in the cases of chrysler and safety-kleen, managers at both organizations followedprospectors’ strategies whereby abc was integrated into critical businessmanagement systems to a greater extent than any of their competitors.moreover, their managers perceived that the adoption of abc had strategicand long-term planning implications and that these radical administrativeand technical improvements could be achieved through abm by managingprocesses and market synergies. accordingly, their learning processes combined both incremental and radical approaches such as education, persuasion as well as trial-and-error experimentations, which persuadedfront-line managers and rank-and-ﬁle employees to accept abc. thechrysler and safety-kleen transitions from abc to abm can be consideredan example of double-loop learning. chrysler’s and safety-kleen’s experiences demonstrate that organizations can make the transition from abc to abm if they adopt the double-loopautonomous and systemic innovation strategies. when innovation involves the autonomous double-loop learning approach, abc is used as a cost control program to manage divisions/units performances. on the otherhand, when innovation evolves from autonomous to systemic double-loop,the shift from abc to abm occurs. the systemic double-loop learningadoption and diffusion of process innovations in management accounting 37mode entails the use of abm to manage both costs and organizational processes related to markets, synergy, and product developments. thistransition from abc to abm occurs when double-loop learning encompassesboth autonomous and systemic innovations. the introduction of a new incentive scheme using non-ﬁnancial measures such as those described by banker, lee, potter, and srinivasan (2000) , or the introduction of bsc ( kaplan & norton, 2001 ), are examples of new management accounting knowledge (adoption) that could lead to radicalorganizational change, that is, transformational learning (diffusion).banker, lee, and potter (1996) suggested that the initial adoption of an innovation (initiation) may be technical and autonomous, that is, limited inits impact on the organization and its systems. this is related to our ﬁrst question: why are some innovations adopted? however, ultimately their initial successful adoption by a single unit or only a few units subsequentlymay result in its being diffused throughout the organization, that is,administrative innovation. for example, the initial adoption of abc istechnical and tends to be autonomous in nature, that is, limited to a divisionor a unit for which it is most appropriate. the successful adoption-implementation of abc in the unit can lead to its diffusion to the otherunits or divisions of the organization. such diffusion can be the result of inter-dependent relationships among divisions/units, or simply because of its obvious success. this is related to our second question: why are someinnovations more successfully diffused than others? in contrast to innovations that are limited to a single unit or begin by being implemented within a single unit, an innovation that initially affectsmultiple units may require new sub-systems to support the innovationand to provide inter-unit coordination. for example, implementing anorganization-wide abc system may require more extensive data-gathering and reporting than was previously the case. it will become apparent that planning, coordinating, and designing supporting information subsystemsneed to be established to ameliorate coordination difﬁculties among thevarious units/divisions that have adopted the accounting innovations. aninnovation initially may be implemented in multiple units rather thansequentially for various reasons. the units may be sufﬁciently inter-dependent that a change in one has implications for all the units. it also maybe that the problem the innovation is intended to resolve is sufﬁciently signiﬁcant that the organization cannot wait to proceed sequentially. as an example of double-loop learning in management accounting, bsc stresses the user’s need to think beyond the traditional management accounting model and integrate a new dimension(s) within it. theorganizational learning and process innovations 38introduction of non-ﬁnancial measures requires a re-orientation in the thinking, that is, double-loop learning, by those involved. davis and albright (2004) reported the results of a quasi-experimental ﬁeld study within a single banking organization. those units which adopted bsc subsequently reported superior performance relative to those that did not. despite the potential beneﬁts, speckbacher, bischof, and pfeiffer (2003) reported data indicating the difﬁculty in the implementation of the bsc. the responses of the ﬁrms that participated in their survey demonstratedthat the evolutionary process required moving from the traditional ﬁnancialmodel to a bsc mixed ﬁnancial and non-ﬁnancial model, required a longertime frame for the beneﬁts of bsc to be realized. in double-loop learning, autonomous and systemic innovations are the types of management accounting innovation with which researchers andconsultants are typically concerned ( gosselin, 1997 ;kaplan & norton, 2001;rowe et al., 2008 ). thus, we are interested in understanding those innovations that make radical changes in the management accountingsystems. we have related single and double loop to extent of innovations;single loop as technical and double loop as administrative innovations. asdescribed earlier, we have extended double-loop learning to include scope ofinnovations, that is, as having an autonomous or systemic focus. we used learning modes, extent, and scope to develop the four types of process innovations. we deﬁned e xtent as the degree to which the innovation affects the organization’s management accounting systems and members’ behaviorswithin the organization. we related extent to the two types of learningidentiﬁed by argyris and schon (1978) . on the contrary, scope refers to the breadth of an innovation’s impact on a continuum ranging fromautonomous innovations that affect a single unit within the organization;and, at the other, by systemic innovations that span multiple/critical units within the organization. these extent and scope dimensions are analyzed in chapter 3.adoption and diffusion of process innovations in management accounting 39chapter 3 the extent and scope dimensions of processinnovations we have utilized a sociological contingency framework to classify and study the adoption and diffusion of management accounting innovations. innovations can vary in a portion of the organization and in the degreeof change that occurs within a unit/division of the organization involved.organizational sociology examines these aspects of innovation and labelthem as extent andscope (sisaye & birnberg, 2010a, 2010b). we examine these two dimensions below. 3.1. an overview of the dimensions of extent and scope of innovations sisaye and birnberg (2010a, 2010b) have described the extent and scope of the innovations dimensions as the degree to which learning has affected theorganizational structures and processes of the organization. within thisframework, extent has been deﬁned as the degree to which the innovation affects the organization’s management accounting administrative structures,systems, and behaviors of members or units within the organization. extentis synonymous with the two types of learning identiﬁed by argyris and schon (1978) discussed earlier. thus, the learning in the extent dimension varies from a technical change within an existing system (single loop) to the adoption of an entirely new administrative system (double loop). while this continuum extends from technical changes that affect a single process ortask to administrative changes that affect organization-wide systems andstructures, we will treat them as though they are dichotomous. as indicated 41earlier (chapter 2), extent is associated with two types of learning: single loop (technical change within an existing system, i.e., gradual-incremental) and double loop (the adoption of an entirely new system, i.e., radical-transformational) ( argyris & schon, 1978, 1996 ). thus, extent can be viewed as a continuum reﬂecting the degree to which the organization’s system has been changed. it is anchored at one end bysmall, incremental changes that improve or update existing systems. it isanchored at the other by the replacement of an existing system with one thatis new and totally different from the prior system. as the extent of theinnovation increases, the relationship between the old system and thenew system becomes less and less apparent and the extent of the changes becomes greater and greater. however, the nature of the learning process, which we have labeled extent , does not completely describe the impact of an innovation on the organization.it is readily apparent that innovations also vary in the portion of theorganization that is affected. the magnitude of innovation dimension-subunit(s) or organization-wide has been referred as scope in organizational sociology. the greater the portion of the organization affected by the change,the greater the innovations scope . thus, we use scope to refer to the breadth of an innovation’s impact, and it is deﬁned as the ubiquitousness of innovation within the organization.because it is related to the portion of the organization affected by theinnovation, it addresses the question of how many units within theorganization are affected by or that adopt the innovation. thus, scope canbe viewed as referring to the degree to which the innovation is integratedinto the core activities of the organization. scope can also be viewed as a continuum, anchored at one end by autonomous or self-contained innovations that affect a few individuals or a single unit within the organization; and, at the other, by systemic innovations that span multiple/critical units within the organization. thus, we will treatthe scope dimension as if it also is dichotomous. in combination, the extentand scope of the innovation describe the manner in which learning affects thestructures and processes/activities of the organization. 3.1.1. extent of innovation dimension: technical and administrative 3.1.1.1. technical innovationtechnical innovations are the most limited changes that can occur. theyaffect a small portion of the organization’s systems and sub-units and leadorganizational learning and process innovations 42to relatively small, that is, incremental, change in the way the organization performs an activity. technical innovations alter the way products andservices are produced and delivered by introducing new means ofproduction or techniques that change the way work is performed (damanpour, 1987 ). technological innovations typically are observable, tangible and trial-able. because of these characteristics their economic impact on the organization is likely to be measurable. because the knowledge required to affect the change is incremental, it is as likely tooriginate from internal sources, that is, intra-organizational innovation, asfrom external sources. many modiﬁed or new measurement and reportingtechniques in management accounting ﬁt into the technical category, forexample, changing the basis for cost allocation within a unit or computerizing an existing activity. because the changes caused by the innovation are readily visible to members of the organization, users’perceptions of the beneﬁts and costs related to the innovation can beidentiﬁed and associated with the adoption or discontinuance of innovations(hekkert, suurs, negro, kuhlmann, & smits, 2007 ; riemer-reiss, 1999). although a technical innovation can be imposed from above, it is essentially a bottom-up strategy for managing change in organizations(damanpour, 1987 ;damanpour & evan, 1984 ). the knowledge that facilitates the organization’s learning is as likely to be generated internally asexternally. regardless of the source, it is likely in most cases to beintroduced at departmental and divisional levels by technical experts andspecialists, including accountants, who are front line managers (champions/advocates) who initiate and implement the innovation process. when technical innovations are targeted for speciﬁc administrative changes, for example, changes in accounting reporting systems, they can beimposed from above by central management. however, they tend to follow a bottom-up strategy in organizations for managing change in technical innovations ( damanpour, 1987 ;damanpour & evan, 1984 ). technical innovations are mainly incremental. incremental changes involve minor adjustments in the design of the management accountingand reporting system. the use of computers to allocate costs is an exampleof such a change. process innovation, the basis of competition for manybusiness organizations, is also an example of incremental change, but itsfocus is on tqm’s strategy of ‘‘driving down costs, and adding features’’ (tushman & o’reilly iii, 1996, p. 10). market and economic structures, for example, a knowledge-based economy, and a well-endowed human capitalfacilitate the success of process innovation ( gloet & terziovski, 2004 ). when technological changes are revolutionary, the innovation alter thethe extent and scope dimensions of process innovations 43basic activities that constitute technology cycle combinations initiating downsizing or complete restructuring of the organization, similar to thosestrategies popularized by bpr ( sisaye, 2001 ). these two types of change may not be independent. incremental changes often occur after transforma- tional change as management attempts to ﬁne-tune the outcome of the innovation. administrative innovations are deﬁned as those changes that occur in the organization’s social/organizational structure as opposed to the technolo-gical system of an organization. they involve major changes in the way anorganization performs its activities. thus they are more likely to have agreater effect on individuals and affect a greater portion of the organization.these changes have the potential to shape and, therefore alter, the internal structures of the organization that directly impact people. administrative innovations also relate to changes in the way the organization is managed,for example, recruitment, resources allocation, or the structure of tasks,authority and rewards ( damanpour & evan, 1984 ). all these are important to managers and changes can positively/negatively affect managers and theirperception of their situation. administrative innovations impact directlyupon members of the work group, organization, or wider society. thus,administrative innovation is a top-down change management strategy that impacts directly upon members of the work group, organization, or wider society. in implementing an administrative innovation an organization’s existing social and organizational culture as well as top management’s leadershipbehaviors and mutually shared vision inﬂuence the outcome of the(administrative) innovations ( elenkov, judge, & wright, 2005 ;pearce & ensley, 2004 ).daft (1978) noted that the success of administrative innovation depends on organizational structural arrangements that support the innovation. structural arrangements refer to the level and ratio of management groups in the organization’s hierarchy. when an organizationis differentiated with several levels of management hierarchy, there is atendency for more vertical communication and administrative intensitywithin the organization’s chain of command. damanpour (1987) argued that administrative intensity, which refers to the level of hierarchy andnumber of management employees in the organization, is related to highmanagerial ratio and multi-layered management hierarchy. they suggested that a multilayered management hierarchical structure generally facilitates the adoption of administrative innovation. because administrative innova-tions start at the top of the management hierarchy, it is administrativeintensity which most affects the adoption process. as the managementorganizational learning and process innovations 44group composition increases, the chances for successful administrative integration and adoption increase ( damanpour, 1987, pp. 679, 682 ). in other words, in highly centralized organizations, the managers at the tophave greater power than in a decentralized organization, and therefore, have greater ability to inﬂuence/impose the changes they desire to make or implement. such administrative innovations tend to have limited impact onorganizational transformation (ot) changes because of constraints inherentin the hierarchical structure. in accounting, typical administrative innovations are designed to improve control and auditing systems, organizational structures, administrativeprocesses, and inter-departmental coordination. control and motivationsystems, including cost and budget systems, are examples of administrative innovation of accounting systems that support the operating activities of the organization and impact more than one functional area of management.the introduction of a new incentive scheme such as that described bybanker et al. (2000) or the introduction of the bsc ( kaplan & norton, 2001) system would be examples of management accounting changes that may be introduced as incremental changes by adding one element of thebsc to a unit’s report, but have the potential ultimately to contribute toradical changes. 3.1.2. the extent of technical and administrative innovations in accounting the extent dimension of an innovation is critical for classifying accountingsystems changes as either technical or administrative innovations. technicalinnovations are a bottom-up strategy, whereas administrative innovations are a top-down strategy for managing change in organizations ( damanpour & evan, 1984 ;gosselin, 1997 ). this difference reﬂects the degree of disruption caused by an innovation. incremental changes within an existing system, for example, altering the basis of cost allocation from labor hours to machinehours, are easily absorbed by a unit. thus while technical innovations can beinitiated or imposed from above, it is essentially a bottom-up change strategy,because, in most cases, departmental and divisional level technical expertsand specialists, who primarily are responsible for planning, initiating and implementing the change, are front-line managers who do not occupy upper level managerial positions. in contrast, administrative changes have as their ultimate, if not immediate, goal system changes that will be implemented across multiplethe extent and scope dimensions of process innovations 45if not all the organization’s units. as the result, an administrative innovation requires initiation by and the support of upper level management. it is notuncommon for consultants to play a role in the decision to implement or theactual implementation of the innovation. as discussed above, an organiza- tion may ‘‘experiment’’ by initiating the innovation in a segment of the organization before deciding whether or not to implement it organizationwide ( banker et al., 2000 ). when used to classify an accounting system innovation, the extent of innovation can be affected by the intended audience as well as any changesrequired in the resource allocation and budgeting processes. the systemchange may be technical (incremental) or administrative (radical) dependingon the extent to which existing systems are affected and the portion of the organization to which the change is applied. for example, abc and other costing methods designed for performance evaluation and reward systemscould be classiﬁed as either technical or administrative depending on thefocus of the cost system and level of analysis – unit or organization. in other words, the extent of both technical and administrative innova- tions is prevalent in management accounting and control systems. the costsystem is technical when it is bureaucratic and adaptive when it has admini-strative dimensions. in addition to the extent dimension, the management accounting typologies are also moderated by the scope dimension, which involves both autonomous and/or systemic innovations. 3.2. scope of innovation dimension: autonomous and systemic innovation is also deﬁned by the breadth of the change occurring within theorganization as the result of the innovation. the scope of a processinnovation depends on whether or not the innovation is central toperforming the operating activities and functions of the organization. thus,scope in this context refers to the degree to which the innovation isintegrated into the core activities of the unit/organization. the greater thecentrality of the innovation, the greater is its scope. we have adopted thetwo dimensions of teece (1996) to describe the scope of an innovation: autonomous/standalone versus systemic/integrative innovations. as the terms imply, they are the end points of a continuum describing the scope of any innovation. an autonomous innovation deﬁnes thoseinnovations with the narrowest scope. it describes those changes that canorganizational learning and process innovations 46be introduced without signiﬁcant changes in other components of the system into which it is introduced. in that sense, it ‘‘stands-alone.’’ by contrast, theintroduction of systemic innovation, represents the other end of thecontinuum, one whose introduction because it is more comprehensive and integrative requires signiﬁcant modiﬁcation in other parts of the organiza- tion’s systems. 3.2.1. autonomous innovations autonomous innovations are, by deﬁnition, very narrow in their impact.they are directed toward a speciﬁc function, production system, operating activity or subunit of the organization. they can be implemented at the departmental/divisional level without affecting any other units in theorganization. autonomous innovations typically are limited to technologi-cal changes. their success depends on whether it can be demonstrated thattechnological innovation contributes to the economic advantage of theadopter. if this is the case, early adopters will have at least a temporaryadvantage until the successful technological innovation has been diffused tolater adopters. for example, a quality control innovation may win more customers, including some of their competitors’ customers to the initial adopter. however, because of the limited nature of these innovations andtherelative ease with which the change can be implemented, proﬁts from autonomous innovations can be short-lived as other organizations observethe success of the early adopters and follow their actions. the early adoptersare viewed as an ‘‘experiment’’ by the potential later adopters. conversely,should they fail; the later adopters can observe this and act accordingly. the autonomous change could involve a narrow ‘‘trial’’ limited to improving a certain aspect of the accounting function; for example, cashmanagement. the change could also include a broad far-reaching aparadigm shift in philosophy; for example, redeﬁning the accountingfunction in relationship to other functions of the organization, or changingthe way accounting is integrated into the strategic planning process of theorganization. when technological changes in accounting and controlsystems are viewed in terms of broader changes occurring within theorganization, they can represent an ‘‘experiment’’ before the organization decides on whether or not to implement the innovation more broadly. thus, the organization can strategically plan the way they proceed with aninnovation. the accounting changes conducted within a subunit of theorganization can create the precondition for system-wide administrativethe extent and scope dimensions of process innovations 47innovations. for example, abc systems have become both integrative and systemic as abc data is being used not only for cost control in manu-facturing production decisions but also in marketing and product develop-ment decisions. 3.2.2. systemic innovations systemic innovations typically are integrative because they affect multipleunits within the organization. they require inter-departmental interactionand are intended to improve broad areas of organizational activities.because systemic innovations are intended to improve broad areas of an organization’s activities, they require inter-departmental interaction. unlike the technological innovations, they involve potentially heterogeneousgroups/units and may lead to conﬂict in the organization because ofconﬂicting goals, values, and interests of the different groups/units. theimplementation process, therefore, likely will require coordination ofresources and activities and sharing of information across divisions,functional areas, or programs. without such coordination/cooperation,there can be conﬂict (e.g., see rowe et al., 2008 ). the coordination of resources and activities and sharing of information across divisions, functional areas, or programs necessary for systemic inno-vations necessitates innovation champions who are capable of promotingboundary-spanning activities needed to disseminate information about theinnovation within the organization. boundary spanners are those indivi-duals who have links with more than one unit and, therefore, are likely to beable to focus on creating organizational linkages among units to promoteorganizational innovation ( stommes, 2001). for systemic innovations to be realized, it is critical that coordination of resources and programs occur atthe highest levels of the affected organizational units. only individuals at thehighest levels may be able to make the necessary changes and share therelevant information. because systemic innovations span many organiza-tional boundaries, there can be ‘‘losers’’ as well as ‘‘winners.’’ in the case ofany innovation, this can lead to resistance to change and coordinationdifﬁculties. in this regard, information ﬂows are key factors to minimizingorganizational and departmental resistance to innovations and convincing the managers of the affected units that these changes are in the best interest of the managers and the organization ( rowe, birnberg, & shields, 2011 ). a systemic innovation approach, in contrast to an autonomous approach, views accounting innovation as a necessary step for improving totalorganizational learning and process innovations 48organization performance. it also focuses on the inter-dependence between the accounting function and other functions of the organization. account-ing changes as the result of implementing abc, for example, are linked tooverall improvements in organizational performance, including all control processes such as formal controls of budgetary goals, and informal controls based on group norms (accepted behaviors) and team-based performancetargets that management uses to measure performance and the achievementof organizational objectives ( sisaye, 2006 ). thus, because accounting can play a central role in the resource allocation and/or incentives of othermanagers, systemic accounting innovations require the managementaccountants to play the roles of facilitators and change agents in dissem-inating an accounting innovation throughout the organization. however, if the organization’s existing structures inhibit systemic innovations (e.g., see rowe et al., 2011 ), there is a need for innovation champions, who have shared values and the authority to promoteboundary-spanning ( stommes, 2001 ). in this regard, information ﬂows may be important in minimizing organizational and departmental resistanceto innovations. as rowe et al. (2008) demonstrated, the systemic change, in that case, a change in the reporting system, highlighted departmental inter-dependencies. the reporting system was used to reduce goal conﬂict and facilitate a strategic change in the organization. 3.2.3. the scope of autonomous and systemic innovations in accounting in accounting, autonomous innovations are rooted in the technical view of accounting and internal control, that is, they are intended to enhance therules and procedural functions of accounting in safeguarding organizational resources and improving subunit performance. systemic innovations, on the other hand, are intended to include all administrative processes, includingaccounting, needed to accomplish corporate objectives. in turn, theseprocesses include various organization-wide controls for informationsystems development and technological change, authorization and report-ing, management accounting systems, safeguarding, management super-visory and documentation. the examples of innovations in accounting mentioned above are typically implemented in the initial stage as autonomous. however, if they aresuccessful, they will be implemented throughout the organization, that is, theywill become systemic in scope because they affect operating activitiesthroughout the organization. this is because accounting innovations involvethe extent and scope dimensions of process innovations 49inter-dependency relationships and affect more than one division; planning, coordination, and the design of supporting information subsystems arerequired. as such, there are more likely to be coordination difﬁcultiesamong the various units/divisions which adopt the accounting innovations if the innovation is perceived as requiring more reporting and data gathering than the existing system. thus, accounting innovations are more likely tomeet with resistance by comparison with autonomous innovations that occurin manufacturing and production technologies. the impact of organizationalstructure (contextual) and process-management communication and relatedleadership behavioral characteristics on the diffusion of administrativeinnovations, particularly accounting changes, is signiﬁcant in performanceevaluation and reporting systems. 3.3. management accounting innovations typologies a combination of the diffusion and adoption of innovation dimensions,namely extent , that is, technical and administrative innovations, and scope , that is, autonomous and systemic, yields four types of managementaccounting innovation typologies: mechanistic (cell 1), organic (cell 2),organizational development (od) (cell 3) and ot (cell 4) as described in table 1 (see introduction, p. xv). although we describe the four innovation typologies shown in table 1, we argue that the od and ot innovation typologies are the two predominantly approaches that are commonly associated with the types of managementaccounting innovations with which researchers and consultants areconcerned ( gosselin, 1997 ;kaplan & norton, 2001 ;rowe et al., 2008 ). we describe mechanistic and organic innovations in chapter 4 to showthat these two innovations in one form or another are incorporated in both od (as mechanistic/technical innovation limited to a unit/division), and ot (as encompassing organic-administrative innovations that haveorganization-wide implications). accordingly, these four types of innovation are discussed in the next two subsequent chapters. chapter 4 deals with mechanistic and organicinnovations, and chapter 5 discusses od and ot innovations.organizational learning and process innovations 50chapter 4 mechanistic and organic innovations this chapter describes the differences between mechanistic and organic innovations. burns and stalker (1961) have applied the mechanistic and organic typologies to describe organizational structures. yeo (2007) has noted the importance of structures in organizational learning and suggested that, when organizational learning occurs, structures adapt themselves inresponse to changes to the environment (p. 543). we argue that the degreesto which organizations or units adopt either mechanistic or organic inno-vations vary according to organizational structures and therefore inﬂuencemanagement accounting innovation typologies. we suggest that, when organizational structures and contextual factors are combined to affect management accounting innovations the sf assumptions of organizational sociology identify two types of organiza- tional structures, namely, mechanistic, and organic, which have beenassumed to affect innovations in organizations in different ways ( burns & stalker, 1961 ). these structures, mechanistic-centralized and organic- decentralized, affect the extent to which an organization can adopt andsuccessfully implement process innovations at the unit or organization level. both the mechanistic-centralized and the organic-decentralized structures are associated with and are commonly used to describe technical innovations. however, they vary in the scope, that is, their autonomous or systemic innovations dimensions. when innovations have autonomousscope, that is, stand-alone innovations, they are described as mechanistic.when they exhibit systemic scope, that is, integrative, they are associatedwith organic innovations. it should be noted that accounting innovations gobeyond individual organizational members learning to adapt to innovationchanges. rather, as with any innovation, innovations in managementaccounting systems are related to the propensity of an organization to undertake them. this propensity can be affected by the organization’s 51.strategy and structures ( gosselin, 1997 ). thus, the ability of organizations to undertake management accounting innovations is primarily related to structural factors. mechanistic innovations (cell 1) are commonly associated with centralized structures and corporate/headquarter focus. on the contrary, organicinnovations (cell 2) are prevalent in decentralized structures with divisionalautonomy and in unit/departmental orientation. 4.1. sf mechanist approaches the mechanistic-organic assumptions of sf address those organizationalfactors related to structural arrangements, contextual factors, job-task workactivities, and human resources management policies. organizations adoptstructures and procedures in search of legitimacy and institutionalization(riebero & scapens, 2006, p. 96 ). structures manifest themselves in centra- lized (mechanistic) and/or decentralized (organic) forms. these structurescan be loose or tightly controlled; they can involve independent or inter-dependent tasks. these conditions have a direct impact on the operation ofmanagement information and control systems that will, in turn, impactorganizational learning and process innovations, which, ultimately, affectsorganizational performance. 4.1.1. organizational structural arrangements the size, work structure, and task complexity of an organization determinesthe form and structural arrangements of that organization. burns and stalker (1961) deﬁned the two types of organizational structures as described below: mechanistic structures are large in size. they process non-complex, routine, and repetitive large-scale tasks that do not require specializedtechnical experts to handle work assignments. they exhibit hierarchicaldifferentiation with several chain-of-command levels. power is concentratedin top management that leads to centralized decision making. mechanistic organizations are characterized by formalization, differentia- tion, and several layers of management hierarchy. when there are large-scale, non-complex tasks, many employees are required to handle thesetasks. there is the need for vertical and horizontal hierarchical arrange-ments as well as task differentiation to process the workﬂow. differentiationorganizational learning and process innovations 52minimizes frequency of contact and exchange of information among units. as these hierarchies separate workﬂow, face-to-face communicationbecomes difﬁcult ( hull & hage, 1982, p. 572 ). all these characteristics of the organization’s work arrangements and control systems can have inhibit process innovation and innovative behavior. organic structures , on the contrary, are usually small or medium in size. they usually are associated with organizations performing complex tasks, which require specialists, and handle a relatively small amount of work.they have ﬂexible organizational arrangements that are amenable and aremore readily adaptable to changes in their institutional environments thanmechanistic organizations. when the administrative structure exhibitsdecentralized structures, there is less differentiation with limited chain-of- command, and minimal bureaucratic features. ozsomer, calantone, and benedetto (1997) noted that organizations that have ‘‘ﬂexible structures facilitate the development and implementation of new ideas’’ (p. 401). as compared to centralized rigid structures, organi-zations with decentralized-ﬂexible structures support innovations becausetheir structures facilitate open communication, and less formal decision-making processes that help accelerate innovations. it also permits managersin individual units to undertake changes that later may be adopted by other units in the organization. the team approach to decision making is more appropriate to and consistent with divisionalized (organic) rather than centralized (mechanistic) organizations because of their decentralized and matrix structures ( sisaye, 2006). the existence of a matrix structure encourages and supports the formation of teams and team decision-making processes through lateralstructures and communication channels. in such structural arrangements,the team-based approach reduces the association of decisions with speciﬁc individuals, rather identifying the group as a whole with the decision- making process. morrill (1991) , in a study of the executive decision-making process, noted that ‘‘matrix systems promote the syndication of risk byentire executive corps as groups of high-level managers embedded incomplex authority relations are responsible for decision-making rather thanindividual managers. in such a structure, it is difﬁcult to trace decisions toany one manager; most decisions must be traced to some group processwithin or between product teams or departments’’ (pp. 871–893). accord- ingly, the team decision-making process ultimately is a joint responsibility of all members of the group, whereby each individual collectively shares thesuccess or the failure associated with team decisions and the risk to any oneindividual for the decision is diminished.mechanistic and organic innovations 534.1.2. contextual job-related tasks issues organizational tasks/jobs can be either simple or complex when they involve coordination of functions that is interdependent among several departments or units. tasks in centralized structures are relatively simple and mechanistic. however, in matrix and organic systems with decentralized structures, taskscan be relatively complex and interdependent, requiring a highly skilledlabor force, experienced management, and autonomous cross-functionalteams. as would be expected, the important issues differ between the twosituations. zetka, jr. (1998) noted that decentralized organizations with coordinating work structures have interdependent tasks where efﬁciency, rationality of production processes, and cost control give rise for the need for units to work together. this can result in the formation of teams composed ofrepresentatives of different units/work groups/etc. in this situation therealways is the possibility that a dominant actor may arise who can stronglyinﬂuence the team and the team’s actions. this can occur when productiontechniques require pooled interdependence, where task performances aresegmented from one another, and when the tasks performed by segments arerelatively simple and task coordination occurs in a face-to-face interaction. this structure is prevalent in traditional (e.g., mechanistic type) manufac- turing organizations where bureaucratic (accounting control) or simplepersonal control prevails. the operation of this team structure corroboratesezzamel and wilmott’s (1998) description of coercive accounting control systems. aszetka, jr. (1998) described, when the technological process includes tasks that require collective or group-based coordination skills, it isnecessary to restructure those task units so that processing of complex information is available on a timely basis for the groups to coordinate their actions collectively (see also perrow, 1986 ;thompson, 1967 ). accordingly, complex task structures in this setting require the development of maturegroups that are synergetic. complex organizations have organic work structures that are inter- dependent and require work teams to coordinate complex tasks. tasks thatare interdependent are complex; consequently, managing transaction costsamong these functions becomes critical in management control ( williamson, 1975, 1987 ). accordingly, work task-related contingencies inﬂuence the type of control system, namely, either command-control or participative, thatwill be predominantly utilized by the team to accomplish organizationalinnovations.organizational learning and process innovations 544.1.3. structure and the control of information flow the form of the organizational structure, that is, whether highly or loosely controlled, the form of the control system and the ﬂow and accuracy of information, has an effect on the innovation strategies, mechanistic or organic, adopted by the organization. when the organization is highlystructured and mechanistic, it gives rise to what ezzamel and wilmott (1998) described as group-based power control or what etzioni (1961) referred to as coercive control system. under this control system, adominant actor or coalition would centralize the accounting informationsystem and centralize the coordination and ﬂow of information. the centralization of control systems has been accelerated by recent advances in information technology, which has contributed to increasedmanagement demand for accounting information for strategic planningpurposes. the tendency is to centralize mechanistic structures with command/coercive control mechanisms because of the desire to control the utilization ofthe outputs of the information system. it is worth noting that, with advancesin information technology, the use of accounting information has expandedbeyond the traditional mechanistic management control function. thus inthese contexts, the sf approach has focused on supporting the functional maintenance of the social system, that is, the power of the dominant individual or group. to enhance their legitimacy and maintain their power,the dominant individual or group adopts an incremental innovation process.these innovations tend to be autonomous or stand-alone innovations. this isbecause innovations of this type lead to a minimum amount of change in anddisruption of the organization, thereby minimizing the likelihood of anopportunity for a change in the power structure. 4.1.4. functionalism and differentiation specialization and differentiation increases the size and complexity of theorganizations. in addition, organizations tend to grow over time and as theresult they tend to become more complex. this complexity creates a need forthe organization to divide into more independent sub-units or departments(boeker, 1989 ). this suggests that there will be a signiﬁcant need for the formation of cross-functional work teams. historically technological innovations and developments have transformed organizations from the unitary (u-form) or functional to the multiple(m-form) or divisional structures. through mergers and acquisitions, m-formmechanistic and organic innovations 55conglomerate organizational structures have emerged. the internal structures of (m-form) divisionalized organizations are highly differentiated, bureau-cratized, formalized, and less democratic. managers in these structures seek tosolidify their power through coercive mechanisms by controlling the decision- making process for resource allocation decisions. they develop several levels of hierarchy to solidify their control over employees, work teams,consumers, and suppliers. the corporation has thus become a dominant institution where human behavior and character is shaped by means of an external reinforcement ofvalues and beliefs that support and promote management actions ( dugger, 1988, p. 101 ). these external values are internalized by employees to become part of the corporate culture that supports organizational activities including the stressing of the need for improved organizational perfor- mance. as dugger (1988) argued, the multiple divisionalized form of organizational structure ‘‘has to do with the organization and control ofpeople. the technological revolution is in organization and informationrather than in production and distribution ythe invention and spread of the new m-form lifted the limit on size; computer technology andcommunication advances helped lift the old size constraints as well’’(p. 85). it has been argued that the growth in the size of organizations has been driven by management’s desire for political power and control of economic resources. economic power provides access to public policy andthe ability to shape the laws, rules, regulations and administrative systemspromulgated by the government ( galaskiewicz et al., 1985 ;jacobs, 1988 ). as a result, managers have instituted autonomous and divisionalized unitsin complex organizations to manage the corporation efﬁciently andeffectively. when managers decentralize power, it takes time for coalitiongroup to grow large enough to exercise signiﬁcant power economically and politically. these decentralized structures directly affect process innovation strategies. given the centralization of authority/power in u-form organiza-tions, the success of mechanistic innovations in these organizations can beattributed to centralized bureaucratic structures that facilitate the adoptionand diffusion of innovations throughout the organization. it is apparent that, as organizations grow in size, internal structures become highly differentiated and bureaucratized, more formalized and lessdemocratic. the decision-making process is politicized and tends to be dominated by a few groups who exercise hierarchical control over resources, employees, consumers, and suppliers. as vogel (1987) argued, organizations that exercise political power do not follow the democratic principles ofpower. when there is a divided coalition of interest groups, decisions areorganizational learning and process innovations 56reached through compromise and negotiated agreements (pp. 63–68). while divisionalized structures are arranged to counter the coordination problemcreated by organizational size and to manage businesses to maximize proﬁts,the corporate bureaucracy, according to galbraith (1967) , has been transformed into ‘‘techno-structures’’. corporate management becametechnocratic rather than bureaucratic by relying on accounting informationsystems to evaluate performance and to control behavior. managementcontrol systems have reinforced goal congruence through the reward-incentives systems, including coercion. in these settings management typically has institutionalized several accounting systems, including budget targets, proﬁt goals, and performanceevaluation systems, to evaluate divisional performance, control management behavior, and develop a commonly shared corporate culture among employees and team members ( sisaye, 1997). as the result, management accounting systems have become avenues for reinforcing goal congruence throughincentive systems, including coercion, if necessary, to secure employee andteam compliance with organizational rules, procedures and goals. thus, institutionalization becomes an effective means by which a planned process innovation change program can be incorporated into the organiza-tional culture and team management/control systems ( sisaye, 2001 ). however, over the long term, bureaucratic rules and formal control systemsmay be dysfunctional if there are continual turbulent changes anddiscontinuity in the organizational environment. this calls for innovationsthat are incremental, that is, mechanistic or organic, to respond to suddenchanges in the competitive environment. 4.1.5. leadership and crisis management when there are volatile changes in the external environment, an organiza-tion’s choice of leadership to direct the organizational growth anddevelopment strategies becomes critical. if these turbulent changes causean organization’s level of performance to fall below some internallyacceptable target or benchmark, for example, the industry average, it cancreate a crisis within the organization. this can lead to the perception of theneed for new leadership and the subsequent formation of work teams to solve the organization’s existing crisis through organizational learning and process innovations. during this transition period from the old to a new‘‘equilibrium, which is superior from the previous one, it is critical that anychanges in the prevailing management control systems align control andmechanistic and organic innovations 57reporting systems with the likely changing organizational performance goals. in a crisis setting, the role of leadership is critical in the successfuladoption and diffusion of any process innovations to align organizationlearning experiences with changes in organizations’ functions, structures, systems, strategies, and policies. the sf institutional approaches in sociology emphasize the key role of the leader in the early stages, evolution, and gradual adaptation of organizational systems to environment changes. moreover, managementof the crisis stage also depends on the ability of the leadership to instituteadaptive organizational system change through a gradual, orderly, andconsensual process. while environmental changes generate discontinuityand ‘‘dysfunction’’ in social systems, the institutional approach emphasizes the ability/necessity of leaders to facilitate an orderly adaptation process in social systems ( perrow, 1986 ). in this regard, giddens (1987) noted that social actions and structures are inﬂuenced by dominant leadership characteristics that shape regular relationsof autonomy and dependence in social interactions. these social systems arecontinually shifting and adapting as leadership resources, skills, roles,positions, and structures change over time. in the process, some systemspersist through incremental innovations by adapting to environmental changes, while others must be totally changed. management in these organizations institutes control system improvements which include changesthat range from individually centered to team-based performance and rewardsystems to facilitate the innovations processes. accordingly, the formation ofcross-functional teams and work groups becomes paramount in the adoptionof technological innovations throughout the organization ( sisaye, 2006 ). thus, institutionalization becomes an effective process through which a planned change program can be incorporated into the organizational culture and team management control systems. however, over the longer term after the innovation has been implemented and integrated into theorganization’s systems, bureaucratic rules and formal control systems mayagain become institutionalized. this can be dysfunctional for anyorganization where there are continual turbulent changes and disconti-nuities in the organization’s environment. 4.1.6. characteristics of mechanistic accounting systems mechanistic accounting systems follow bureaucratic-behavior controlsystems where budget targets and standards are used to evaluate divisionalorganizational learning and process innovations 58performance. when accounting control systems are tight, mechanistic, and follow detailed bureaucratic-behavior evaluation rules and procedures inperformance evaluations, they are referred to as restrictive control exchangesystems. managers who subscribe to mechanistic control systems are more likely to exhibit behaviors associated with technocrats who have practices of putting divisional performance goals and interests ahead of overall organi-zational objectives and interests. these managers may pursue technologicaladvances that beneﬁt their divisions even when such innovations do notcontribute to increased proﬁtability of the organization as a whole. topromote goal congruency, it is desirable for corporate management toinstitute responsibility-based accounting systems to control divisionalmanagement’s performance. however, because mechanistic control systems tend to be tight and restrictive, they focus on short-term accounting-based performance indicators. these structures promote immediate proﬁt targets,that is, a short-term horizon, whereby an organization’s performance ismanaged on a quarterly or annual basis. accounting bottom-line perform-ance measures have thus advanced the stakeholders external controlinterests associated with proﬁtability of divisionalized organizations. however, those economic changes that the organization may view as ‘‘crisis’’ have resulted over the years in changes in organizations’ formal control systems. organizations have downsized to cut costs, pursued mergers, and take-over strategies for growth, instituted reengineering, andnew structures to facilitate process innovations that aid its adaptation to itschanged environment. these changes coupled with advances in informationtechnology, and customer support through total quality and corporatecultural changes to support environmental management, in turn, all havechanged the role of accounting information systems in organizations. in such a turbulent environment, standardized mechanistic accounting control systems will not contribute to improved divisional and corporateperformance. if control systems are institutionalized as highly mechanisticand orderly systems, they create an organizational climate that promotescompliance and cooptation. these systems also discourage managers fromtaking risks for innovative changes. the cost an unsuccessful deviation fromorganizational norms is likely to be perceived as much higher than the gainsto the manager of any successful innovation. while management control systems are necessary for motivation, coordination, and performance evaluation purposes, they can have seriousdysfunctional consequences if they are implemented so as to create arestrictive and tightly controlled environment. on the contrary, a looselystructured control system also may not facilitate innovative behavior in themechanistic and organic innovations 59absence of an organizational structure and norms that promote autonomy, independence, coordination of activities, team work, and accountability ofindividual performance. in general, the design and implementation ofcontrol systems will be shaped by structural contingency variables such as organizational size, technology, business competitive environment, as well as by internal political processes of management coalition groups and externalstakeholders. the interplay of power control and control of accountingsystems, combined with the availability of organizational resources,inﬂuences the diffusion and adoption of mechanistic innovations processesin organizations ( sisaye, 1997 ). 4.2. cell 1: mechanistic innovations mechanistic innovations are more likely to prevail in large manufacturingand production-oriented organizations. manufacturing organizations havefunctional structures suited for processing non-complex, routine, andrepetitive large-scale tasks that do not require staff with specializedtechnical expertise. functional organizations have bureaucratic structuresthat are hierarchically differentiated with several layers of management hierarchy. many employees perform large-scale, non-complex tasks. both vertical and lateral hierarchical arrangements and differentiation arerequired to process the workﬂow. ambrose and schminke (2003) argued that mechanistic structures have bureaucratic structures that are centralized and have hierarchical, formal rulesof control, prescribed orders and regulations, deﬁned job descriptions, as wellas deﬁned management–subordinate relationships ( ambrose & schminke, 2003, p. 295 ). when an organization puts emphasis on procedural justice related to consistency, accuracy, and standardization, it is considered to be afunctional organization. the human, that is, subjective, element is reduced bythe decision-making process that focuses on ‘‘formal rules and procedures’’,which increases the illusion of ‘‘perceived organizational support’’ in individualsocial exchange relationships ( ambrose & schminke, 2003, p. 297 ). according to wejnert (2002) , centralized structures are generally effective in organizations that have ‘‘vertical channels of inﬂuence. they possess highlycentralized, stratiﬁed networks use coercive pressure on their members to achieve conformity of practices, causing homogeneity and increasing rates of adoption’’ ( wejnert, 2002, p. 308 ). in other words, where there are ‘‘vertical and horizontal channels of inﬂuence’’, organizational networks can facilitateadoption of information by members by ensuring contact with formerorganizational learning and process innovations 60adoptees and providing advice ( wejnert, 2002, p. 308 ). workshops, seminars, and conferences provide educational advice and acceptance of new practices among participants ( wejnert, 2002, pp. 307–309 ). thus, mechanistic structures provide stable systems that are suited for transactional leaders who promote institutionalized learning that focuses ongradual and incremental changes. according to vera and crossman (2004) , there is a tendency for transactional leaders to prefer mechanistic structuresthat ‘‘are highly centralized, formalized and standardized’’ because theyreinforce learning that follows ‘‘current routines’’, which ‘‘enable individualsand groups’’ to learn from their ‘‘experience’’ (p. 232). these leaders willfollow systems and procedures to enact incremental change that workthrough existing bureaucratic structures and systems to implement innov- ations, learning, and change. in mechanistic structures, single-loop learning has action-oriented change characteristics that are directed toward changing members’ behaviors. coghlan (2003) attributed this to the fact that the ‘‘mechanistic-oriented action research encompasses traditional action research as expressed in organization develop- ment and participatory action research leading to pragmatic outcomes such asthe management of change or problem resolution’’ (p. 202). generally, inmechanistic-oriented action research, learning ‘‘is directed at confronting and resolving a pre-identiﬁed issue in managing change or problem solving’’ (p. 453). the change agents work together with members of the organization inidentifying the issue, taking the appropriate action and evaluation to appraisethe action. the approach focuses on the change agent having the skills for theintervention process. it focuses on the leader or the consultant/agent as theprincipal actor for the change process (p. 453). mechanistic-oriented intervention is primarily intended as an ‘‘instru- mental approach to achieving planned pragmatic outcomes and generating usable knowledge’’ ( coghlan, 2003, p. 455 ). the changes focus on improving operational performance whether it is directed to a team or at a problem that needs to be solved to improve performance, for example,resolving communication problems between organization members, and/orclients, etc. the procedure is to collect data, analyze the problem, and takeactions by management to resolve them (p. 458). when mechanistic structures prevail, differentiation minimizes both frequency of contact and exchange of information ﬂow. as these hierarchies separate workﬂow, face-to-face communication becomes difﬁcult ( hull & hage, 1982, p. 572 ). differentiation and specialization eventually contribute to formalized control systems and relationships that create communication barriers and reduce the ﬂow of information, information sharing, coordination,mechanistic and organic innovations 61and cooperation among organizational units and suppress dissemination of innovation. the decision-making process becomes centralized, with minimalinvolvement of employees at the lower levels of management. all these make aninnovation across units much more difﬁcult. mechanistic structures support the institutionalization of management control systems featuring increased bureaucratization and the tightening ofcontrol of resource-sharing and allocation mechanisms through operationalprocedural manuals that require documentations, and adherence tooperating procedures ( kober, ng, & paul, 2007, pp. 446–447 ). although these management control structures change to ﬁt management’s strategies,the changes are not likely to be extensive. rather, they will encompassincremental and procedural changes. jamali (2005) has attributed this gradual change process to the traditional management model of functionalcentralized structural systems being driven primarily by rules, prescriptions,efﬁciency, cost reduction, hierarchical structures, and division of labor toimprove production. it is derived from scientiﬁc management principles ofdivision of labor, functional management of centrality, stability, planning,organizing and controlling organizational operations, and bureaucraticmanagement of subordination and hierarchical authority. this view assumesthat organizations operate in a stable environment where any changes in markets and competitive environments are predictable (p. 105). when mechanistic innovation prevails, management planning and control systems become more formal and institutionalized, formal rules specify procedures and employee roles. accounting numbers in effect control employeebehavior as well as the operating activities of the organization. accounting andaudit tasks are centralized to handle operations and production activities thatare routine, repetitive, and programmable ( dirsmith & mcallister, 1982 ). management’s reliance on accounting control systems to monitor employee performance restricts the use to which personal feedback can be put and ignores the use of inter-personal relationships in management control systems amongmanagers. accounting systems support reward allocation systems whichencourages individual manager’s compliance with management’s objectives.the accounting systems provide information (‘‘scorecard’’) that assistsmanagers in achieving proﬁtability and income objectives. these systemsbecome instrumental in controlling employee behavior as well as the operatingactivities of the organization ( sisaye & birnberg, 2010b ). because traditional mechanistic cost accounting systems are designed to allocate costs, determine product costing, and measure short-term perfor-mance, they create structural constraints to the implementation of organiza-tion-wide process innovation programs. by contrast, at the departmental level,organizational learning and process innovations 62bureaucratic structures play an important role in adoption and diffusion decisions. in centralized and formal organizations, the likelihood thatadministrative innovations will be implemented is high because the centra-lized structure found in mechanized organizations provides the support necessary to implement accounting innovations organization-wide. it is not necessarily the case for decentralized structures because management mayhave the ability to block the innovations if their perception of the innova-tions are that they are not promoting divisional goals and interests consistentwith organization-wide interests. the predominance of a super-ordina te or subordinate relationship in performance evaluation and reward systems reduces coordination among departments and divisions and discourages the instigation of any dissemination of innovation across organizational divisions/departments. in other words, each unit is in a separate hierarchy. t his favors standalone innovations, and inhibits the ﬂow of innovation informati on across units at the same levels but in different hierarchies. these characteris tics of mechanistic innovations create structural conditions that can inhibit the introduction of planned intervention and organization-wide innovation progra ms and prevent the effective participa- tion of employees in process innovati ons affecting a signiﬁcant number of the organization’s divisions/units. as a result, the maximum potential beneﬁts from the diffusion of an innovation ar e not likely to be realized within the organization without changing th e scope of the innovation process. 4.3. cell 2: organic innovations when the extent of innovation is technical, and the scope is systemic,management accounting innovation tends to become organic in orientation. the word ‘‘organic’’ has been used to describe organizational structures that are ﬂexible and adaptable to changes in their institutional environments(perrow, 1986 ;scott, 1987 ;young, houghland, & shepard, 1981 ). organic structures are characterized by complex tasks that require subject matterspecialists to handle relatively small tasks. in contrast to the mechanisticstructure discussed above, they are characterized by horizontal hierarchies,little differentiation, limited chain of command, minimal bureaucraticfeatures, and decentralized decision-making. all these facilitate the open ﬂow of information and dissemination of innovation across divisions/units and within the organization ( burns & stalker, 1961 ). in organic structures, there can be adaptability of rules and regulations, depending on the circum-stances. in other words, there is limited rule ﬁxing and observance when themechanistic and organic innovations 63environmental contexts call for change ( ambrose & schminke, 2003, p. 295 ). there is generally less reliance on rigid formal control systems to monitor employee and organizational performance. according to vera and crossman (2004) , most organic structures support transformational leaders; individuals who are receptive to change. these leaders prefer organizational structures that are decentralized and cancoordinate groups, committees, teams work, and initiatives. communica-tion is a lateral process and involves coordination and integration. memberswork together to accomplish the organization’s vision. organic structureswith adaptable systems are necessary to support strategies that call for theorganization to be characterized by continuous change, process innovations,and growth (pp. 232–233). however, the changes undertaken under organic innovations are likely to be more complex than those undertaken by mechanistic organizations. to this effect, coghlan (2003) has suggested that ‘‘organistic-oriented action research is more complex and subversivebecause it is guided by a primary aspiration to study the inquiry processand help it transform through increasingly intensive learning in action’’(p. 452). in organic change, the group serves as the agent of change. it is agroup-oriented approach where ‘‘the participants themselves engage in anaction inquiry process in which inquiry into their own assumptions and ways of thinking and acting is central to the research problems’’ (p. 452). it allows members to identify and explore those assumptions that govern theirbehaviors, actions, and values. they question them and become consciousof those behaviors to direct their actions in a goal-oriented direction. theprocess involves collective reasoning and inquiry where the focus is onlearning rather than on practical/immediate outcomes. coghlan (2003) elaborated that organistic oriented action research is ‘‘guided by a primary aspiration to study the inquiry process and help it transform through increasingly intensive learning in action’’ (p. 455). the process thereby makes members aware of their own assumptions and thoseof others. during the discussion they can challenge existing assumptions andvalues and identify those that need to be changed (pp. 459–461). the organic change process of inquiry and dialogue among members is likely to increase employee satisfaction and engagement in work, as opposedto the experience of employees in mechanistic structures. ambrose and schminke (2003) attributed these perceptions of employee satisfaction as being dependent on organizational structures. they suggested that organicstructures do provide basis for a justice that is based on ‘‘interpersonaltransactions’’ which involve face-to-face communication. they referred tothem as ‘‘interactional justices’’ and supervisory trust (p. 297). theseorganizational learning and process innovations 64characteristics direct the attitudes and behaviors of employees toward the operation of management control systems. accounting systems andinnovations under organic structures are more likely to promote trust andcommitment among employees and, therefore, to support these changes. within the context of organic innovations, management accounting systems are viewed as ‘‘informative’’. they provide the necessary economic andﬁnancial information about the company’s operating activities. by contrast,under mechanistic environment, they are used to control management behaviorand company operations ( johnson & kaplan, 1987 ). decentralized structures enable an accounting staff to participate actively in the planning and imple-mentation of programs that will affect their departmental accomplishments.their full involvement and empowerment to make changes in accounting functions is expected to improve and enhance the quality of work performed in the accounting department. the prevailing assumption is that innovativeorganizations concentrate on managing their activities instead of managingcosts because activity management created sources of competitive value for theorganization ( johnson, 1992 ; see also jones & dugdale, 2002 ). organic innovative systems encourage the institutionalization of team- based management approaches as substitutes for formal control systemswhere teams can independently establish their own performance goals (drake, haka, & ravenscroft, 1999 ). a team-based management control system is inherently rooted in a cognitive approach to managing employees whereby they can use personal, face-to-face communication, ﬂexiblefeedback, and interpersonal relationships to promote trust, cooperation,collegiality, and coordination among themselves and their respectivedivisions ( birnberg, 1998 ). accordingly, organic systems encourage the dissemination of information and organization-wide process innovations.whereas the mechanistic approach limits the scope of innovations to the domain of internal control and management accounting, organic changes support innovations that transcend accounting and the internal controlfunction throughout the organization ( sisaye & birnberg, 2010b ). 4.4. effects of organizational structures on mechanistic and organic innovations mechanistic and organic innovations are obtained by maintaining the extentdimension, that is, the type of an innovation, constant at the technical leveland varying the scope dimension, that is, the number of divisions/units inmechanistic and organic innovations 65the organization that are affected by the change, between autonomous (one or very few units) and systemic (many units). mechanistic innovation (cell 1)is obtained when the extent dimension is technical and the scope isautonomous. on the contrary, organic innovation (cell 2) occurs when the extent is technical and the scope is systemic. when comparing mechanistic versus organic innovation, it is important to examine the effect of organizational structure on the adoption and diffusion of any process innovation in the management accounting systems. in otherwords, the success of accounting innovation depends on organizationalstructural arrangements. in decentralized organizations, there are small-scaleautonomous units that handle small complex tasks and large-scale divisionsthat process some simple tasks. decentralization promotes autonomy in decision-making and empowers managers to make investment decisions that improve the performance of their divisions. this indicates that organizationtype is not the only factor that affects innovation. the organization management literature suggests that organic type organizations encourage process innovation. for example, hull and hage (1982) indicated that the relationship between the size of the organization and its responsiveness to innovation is more applicable to high-technologyﬁrms than to other types of organization. they ‘‘argue[d] that the organic model is not the only appropriate model [for innovations]. for example, organizations having mixed structures for performing large scale andcomplex work can achieve a medium level of innovation’’ (p. 566). thissuggests that large-scale organizations with decentralized structures haveattributes that support organic innovations. in other words, there is a causal relationship between organizational structures and process innovation strategies. that is, the success of processinnovation depends on the type of organizational structure. it has been documented that, while organic structures are best suited for technical innovations, mechanistic structures are more appropriate for administrativeinnovations ( daft, 1978 ;damanpour, 1987 ;hull & hage, 1982 ). gosselin (1997) suggested that mechanistic organizations with high management intensity and administrative hierarchy support administrativeinnovations. they possess both a centralized decision-making process and aconcentrated power in top management which facilitate the adoption anddiffusion of administrative innovations, including accounting and informa- tion system innovations. while a formal control system encourages structured administrative innovation, it cannot support such innovation withoutpromoting changes in its hierarchical structure and chain of command.because administrative innovations are introduced at organizational levelsorganizational learning and process innovations 66higher than the technical/operational hierarchy, the support of all higher levels of management is essential for administrative innovations to diffusethroughout the organization-at-large. according to daft (1978) , the success of administrative innovation depends on organizational structural arrangements that support innovation.structural arrangements refer to the level and ratio of management groupsin the organizational hierarchy. when there are more levels of managementpersonnel, there is greater management hierarchy and intensity within theorganization. damanpour (1987) argued that administrative intensity, as related to high managerial ratio and multilayered management hierarchy,facilitates the adoption of administrative innovation. because administrativeinnovations start at the top of the management hierarchy, administrative intensity affects the adoption process the most. as the management group ratio rises, the chance for successful administrative integration and adoptionincreases ( damanpour, 1987, pp. 679, 682 ). such administrative innovations tend to be limited in scope because of constraints inherent in the hierarchicalstructure. the successful implementation of administrative innovations requires both behavioral and structural changes. behavioral change strategiesinvolve the adoption of new attitudes and values by individuals and groups. attitudinal changes are learned over time and are brought about by cultural training programs. these educational programs involve work-force training,teaching of new cultural work behaviors such as team and cooperative work,and empowerment of workers to make changes. top management providesleadership, vision, inspiration, support, and commitment to innovationprograms. management ensures that champions who are change agents/facilitators are in the right place to implement innovation programs. thereis an open line of communication with all organization members to solicit their support and commitment for planned programs. organization members form functional teams that span and cut-across traditionalboundaries to gather information, deﬁne/develop benchmarks, and imple-ment change programs ( davenport, 1993, pp. 175–183 ;stommes, 2001 ). chia and koh (2007) suggested that the successful adoption of admin- istrative innovations in public organizations, for example, in their study ofthe singapore government agencies, depended on the adoption of innov-ations that are inﬂuenced by perceived attitudes and cultures regarding the innovation by both organization members as well as management. in the adoption of administrative innovation in particular, both the specialists andthe generalists play roles for the success and beneﬁt of the innovation to theorganization. the organization culture of management, employees, and themechanistic and organic innovations 67ﬂexibility and adaptability of organizational structures inﬂuence the success for adoption of administrative innovations. this is particularly applicable tomanagement accounting practices in public organizations. in the case ofsingapore, the government adopted an objective statement about providing high quality services at lower costs to improve organizational performance. in essence, the government focused on budget-by-results for publicexpenditures. these changes were instituted and accomplished by healthcare organizations within the context of administrative innovations. there are several case studies related to housing projects that have reﬂected the impact administrative innovations on making the housingorganization more responsive to community needs by allowing easy accessto housing information. hennessy (2005) examined four cases of housing authorities that introduced administrative reforms. she argued thatadministrative innovation makes the system more responsive to communityneeds through simpliﬁed non-bureaucratic structures that that are betterable to respond to local needs. the structure is simpliﬁed through betterinformation system structures that allow residents to have access toinformation online for easy reference and uploads to customers (residents)as well as staff (employees). similarly, barron (2006) provided examples from four cases of housing commissions/authorities which instituted administrative innovations. she suggested that the administrative structure was simpliﬁed where employees were divided into teams to compete. theyconducted their own meeting instead of the ‘‘standard leader directedmeeting’’ to encourage ‘‘full participation of employees’’ (p. 23). the teamscompeted in answering questions following the format of the televisionprogram ‘‘jeopardy’’ – referred to as ‘‘housing jeopardy’’. it intensiﬁedcompetition to work together to give correct answers using the web or othermodes – telephone, ofﬁce visit – of communication. administrative reforms focused on broader organizational issues related to environment, cultural values, and behavior as well as the history of theorganization. instead of dealing with technical and interpersonal diffusion,these innovations address structural and institutional arrangements.accordingly, administrative innovations, in general, address ‘‘the spreadof behavioral strategies and structures rather than technical innovations,emphasize adoptions by social collectivities, works with a much largerhistorical and spatial canvas, and incorporates diffusion as one sort of explanation rather than as the overacting framework’’ ( strang & soule, 1998, p. 268 ). these social collectives usually include behavioral and cultural changes directed toward administrative innovations.organizational learning and process innovations 68when management introduces cultural changes to support administrative innovations, process intervention changes facilitate the development of new behavior patterns to foster interpersonal and inter-group interaction andcreate improved formal and informal communication linkages within work groups/teams and among individuals at all organizational levels ( sisaye, 2005). according to van de ven (1986) , ‘‘from a managerial viewpoint, to understand the process of innovation is to understand the factors that facilitate and inhibit the development of innovations. these factors includeideas, people, transactions, and context over time’’ (p. 591). the end resultof process changes is to encourage divisions and departments to worktogether to achieve organizational level objectives ( rowe et al., 2008, 2011 ). when process innovations are accompanied by cultural changes, they have the desirable effect of motivating employees to participate in achieving departmental and organizational-wide objectives. on the contrary, structural change entails changes in an organization’s divisions/departments and functions, job design, organization of workprocesses, and performance evaluation systems ( zamutto & o’connor, 1992). technological innovations that may beneﬁt the department or the organization as a whole also have resulted in the downsizing andrestructuring of organizations. they can also lead to a paradigm shift within the organization. kuhn (1970) stated that a paradigm shift occurs when there is a major departure from the existing accepted state of theoretical thinking, analysis, and mode of operations. the informationtechnology revolution has led to such a paradigm shift in the way in whichmanagement accounting systems are viewed to support both mechanisticand organic innovations. the paradigm shift in accounting has been facilitated by a system (company-wide) rather than a functional (departmental) view of the role of accounting in process innovations. it suggests that a balanced and appropriate mix of strategy is necessary between technical and administrativeinnovations focusing on the relationship between product inputs (material,labor, capital) and outputs (products, customers, stakeholders). accordingly,innovation entails a radical level of change. it requires a long-term horizon,a broad cross-functional scope, and a combination of both cultural(behavioral) and structural (organizational) changes. process innovationuses information technology as the primary enabler of change. innovation is likely to succeed if there is a top-down strategic vision and orientation to change involving the full participation, cooperation, and acceptance of thechange process by employees at all levels of the organization.mechanistic and organic innovations 69this paradigm shifts in management accounting systems has been aided by the adoption of organizational development (od) and organizational transformation (ot) process innovations. compared to mechanistic andorganic innovations that focus on technical innovations, od and ot focus more on administrative innovations that affect the organization’s overall structures, including accounting systems. while od has an administrativeautonomous scope focusing on a division-wide innovation strategy, ot incontrast has a systemic scope and has broader implications for changing theorganization at large. whether organizations adopt either or both the odand/or ot process innovation strategies, they are implemented to alignmanagement control systems with overall improved performance andproﬁtability objectives. the od and ot administrative innovation strategies for process innovations are discussed in chapter 5.organizational learning and process innovations 70chapter 5 organizational development (od) andorganizational transformation (ot) process innovation strategies this chapter expands sisaye and birnberg articles (2010a, 2010b) to discuss organizational development (od) and organizational transformation (ot) (cells 3 and 4) of the management accounting process innovation framework presented in the 2 /c22 contingency of table 1 . compared to mechanistic and organic innovations presented in chapter 4, od and ot focus more on administrative innovations that affect the organization’s overall structures, including accounting systems. administrative innovations have a broaderimpact than technical innovations that are limited to a single unit ordepartment. they can impact several organizational tasks, includingperformance evaluation, reporting systems, accounting, and productionfunctions. while both od and ot reﬂect the bro ader administrative innovation strategy compared to mechanistic (cell 1) and organic (cell 2) innova- tions, they vary along the scope dime nsions of the innovation strategy. on the one hand, od has an autonomous scope. it is a limited approach to the innovation strategy. on the other hand, ot has a systemic scopeand has broader implications for cha nging the organization at large. in general, od and ot can be classiﬁed as dichotomous, or as two forms of organizational change strategies that can be placed on at opposite ends ofa continuum. the dichotomy arises from the relative emphasis placed on thescope of innovation. when scope is limited to a single unit or function, it is 71viewed as an autonomous innovation. by contrast, a systemic innovation is one that covers several interdependent or interrelated functions. another way of describing the difference between them is the od approach is self- contained (autonomous), that is, limited to a department/division; whereas,ot has an integrative (systemic) scope that is organization-wide in orien-tation. however, both od and ot follow a radical strategy embedded indouble-loop learning. they pursue complementary strategies for processinnovations. these differences in scope between od and ot are apparent intheir organizational learning strategies. the description of process innovation strategies demonstrates that the unit/ division focused change approach in od is being classiﬁed as double-loop(autonomous) learning and ot as double-loop (systemic) learning strategyembedded in radical (reorientation) organizational learning. in other words,both od and ot have been classiﬁed as double-loop learning with od havingan autonomous learning focus conﬁned to a division and/or unit; whereas,ot has a double-loop systemic focus encompassing integration of learningorganization-wide. both od and ot reﬂect administrative innovationstrategies instead of the narrowly deﬁned technical processes found in mechanistic and organic changes. administrative innovations require that units/divisions pursue od or undertake ot strategy to accomplish asigniﬁcant organizational change. these changes more than likely reﬂect theadopter’s perception of a need to change to meet competition. 5.1. cell 3: organizational development od refers to cell 3 of the adoption-diffusion innovation typology deﬁned intable 1 . it has an administrative extent and an autonomous scope. od hastable 1. typologies of management accounting innovations based on extent and scope of innovations dimensions. scope extenttechnicalautonomous systemic cell 1: mechanistic cell 2: organic administrativecell 3: organizational developmentcell 4: organizational transformationorganizational learning and process innovations 72been used pre-dominantly in organizational change and sociology literature to describe cultural innovation programs that are directed toward a change inindividual employee behavior. in accounting, the od approach is importantbecause accounting innovations, such as abc, are directed toward a change in managers’ behavior and the use of accounting data to evaluate perform- ance. the od approach is applicable in the use of abc data at the divisionalor unit level. before explaining the application and use of od in accountinginnovations, we will deﬁne od and summarize its innovation approaches asdescribed in organizational sociology and behavior literature. 5.1.1. organizational development: deﬁnition porras and silvers (1991) described od as a change program designed tocreate a better ﬁt between the organization’s capabilities and the demands ofits current environment or to promote changes in the organization that helpit better ﬁt the future environment it expects to face. od attempts to achievethis through planned intervention strategy for organizational and societalchanges consistent with stability and maintenance of the social system(sisaye & stommes, 1985). recently, the focus of od has shifted from directly affecting individual and group cognition and behavior to a more indirect process intervention intended to alter behavior through changes instructure of the reward systems (porras & silvers, 1991). because od is concerned with multiple units, it treats culture as an internal organizational variable. od interventions focus on the organiza-tion’s cultural subsystems to uncover the underlying values, beliefs, norms,and rules prevalent in the organization ( smirch, 1983 ). this knowledge allows leaders/managers to devise intervention strategies consistent with this culture to make the organization responsive to environmental changes. an innovation that is inconsistent with the culture of the organization at best isvery difﬁcult to achieve and is likely to be rejected. the od approach advocates an sf system view of organizations and change. in this view of organizations, changes in organizational subsystemstrigger adaptation of individual behavior consistent with organizationalgoals. porras and hoffer (1986) considered the functional-congruence viewof od as important for organizational change. they proposed that, ‘‘if behavior is inﬂuenced by characteristics of an organization’s internal environment – that is, its system elements – then altering the systemelements should lead to altering behavior on the job. this, they proposed, isthe function of od interventions’’ (p. 480).od and ot process innovation strategies 73od strategy, when properly planned, not only changes employee behavior and improves management’s supervisory skills, but it can also enhance the organizational climate. organizational climate, in turn, inﬂuences laborrelations, ‘‘employees’ behavior and organizational performance’’ ( porras et al., 1982, pp. 443, 445 ). organizations rely on od intervention strategies and provide support to champions and experts who can facilitate congruity ofemployee behavior with organizational goals. congruencies of behavioroccur in those behaviors that are consistent with od agents’ values, areadaptable to change, and open to new ideas and experiential learning. in all,they are adaptable to organization culture and values. 5.1.2. organizational development process innovation strategies the od intervention strategy is described as a reformist, double-loop, step-by-step, incremental process that focuses on division/unit level interventions.the approach emphasizes the importance of leadership and champions in thechange management. as such, od stresses cultural change and education thatfocus on changing and re-orienting employee attitudes, behaviors, workhabits, and beliefs to facilitate the acceptance of the innovation. the od approach to change involves a gradual adjustment and is phased-in over time. it emphasizes the importance of employee involvement, participation,consensus building, and, ultimately, the acceptance in the change processby those working in the unit(s). according to buller and mcevoy (1989) , in od, ‘‘the initial adoption of a planned organizational change is a function of a number of individual,group, and organizational factors. these factors combine to determine theoverall level of acceptance and commitment to the change by organization members’’ (p. 35). these factors are supported through training, employee involvement, promotion, and a combination of intrinsic as well as extrinsicrewards ( buller & mcevoy, 1989 ). the objective of od is not only the improvement of administrative structures and organizational performance butalso fostering the personal growth of employees that is expected to facilitatefuture innovations and learning. 5.1.3. od and double-loop-based autonomous change/learning strategy the od approach to change advocates a gradual and incrementaladjustment of change over time. it emphasizes the importance of consensus,organizational learning and process innovations 74participation, acceptance, and employee involvement in the change process. institutionalization of incremental change is supported through training,employee involvement, promotion, and a combination of career growth andmonetary rewards ( buller & mcevoy, 1989, p. 36 ). these incentives contri- bute not only to the personal development of organization members butalso to the improvement of organizational performance. the od intervention strategy is described as double-loop, autonomous and unit/division- focused. it places emphasis on leadership as changeagents (champions) in the management of process innovations. as such, odstresses cultural change and education, which focuses on altering employeeattitudes, behaviors, work habits, and beliefs. thus while the number ofunits/divisions affected is quite small, the changes required of the unit/ division are signiﬁcant. these are radical changes in the thinking of the participants and thus the double-loop nature of the intervention strategy. the double-loop learning autonomous innovative approach of od has been imitated and is popular in continuous improvement programs such astqm. like od, tqm is based on the principles of education, training, andorganizational learning to sustain continuous improvement and change inorganizational performance. tqm follows od’s intervention strategies ofusing teamwork, interdivisional cooperation, cultural change, and institu- tional development in the planning and implementation of successful process innovations ( sisaye, 2001 ). tqm utilizes od’s approach of bottom-up participation and the use of change leaders (e.g., quality circles) as successful avenues for planning andimplementing production and quality improvement programs. the autono-mous double-loop gradual change strategy of tqm is reﬂected in the changesmade in various accounting systems. for example, changes in accounting andinternal control systems have a division focus that is primarily incremental, involving procedural and operating changes (sisaye & bodnar, 1994). when accounting innovations are viewed as od intervention strategies, they becomeadministrative tools involving changes in planning, budgeting, internal control,and reporting systems that affect managerial communication and decision-making processes. in general, the culture of od shapes the accounting systemand the degree to which planned administrative innovative changes can bedesigned and implemented in management accounting systems. we suggest that, in accounting, the line between od autonomous and systemic double-loop learning can be illustrated by the organization’sallocation of overhead. as the allocation of overhead costs is expanded toinclude several cost pools and drivers to allocate overhead costs, as in abc,the movement from double-loop autonomous (stand-alone) to systemicod and ot process innovation strategies 75(integrative) learning becomes clearer. this can be considered to be a radical change when the abc system not only changes the accounting system fromone controlling costs and expenditures in a division (autonomous doubleloop) to one where abc is integrated into the ﬁnancial performance measure and reporting systems and is part of managing processes in the organization (systemic double loop). when organization-wide intervention requires systemic change, it can create coordination problems. ansari and euske (1987) report an example of this. headquarters failed to recognize that a successful implementation of thenew system necessitated an institutional environment that led managementto accept the change either because of its obvious merit or its support byheadquarters. in the defense headquarter and depots (divisions) management control environment which they described, the repair depots were physically removed from headquarters in washington, dc, and were decentralizedoperationally as well. announcing the new system was not sufﬁcient to over-come the resistance to change which, in fact, was not even observable byheadquarters. this illustrates that employee resistance to a change/innovation may be present in the adoption and implementation of accounting innovations,particularly in traditional manufacturing organizations. as ness and cucuzza (1995) reported, employee resistance was the ‘‘single biggest obstacle for abc implementation’’ to overcome at chrysler and safety-kleen (p. 130).introducing changes in an organization can lead to fear and ambiguityamong employees regarding job security, and new performance measures canresult in opposition and resistance to innovations by the employees. ness and cucuzza (1995) revealed that both chrysler and safety-kleen overcame employee resistance through persuasion and education. these twocorporations followed a planned od autonomous change strategy where education about abc-generated consent and commitment from employees. seminars and workshops were conducted regularly. at the same time,experimentation with the introduction of abc at a plant and at divisionlevels facilitated involvement of local and front-line managers in theimplementation of abc. 5.1.4. od and administrative innovation the od approach to innovation involves both the extent of administrative innovation and the scope of autonomous innovation. as such, it is a popular approach among managers who advocate autonomous changes inorganizational learning and process innovations 76administrative structures and accounting-reporting systems that tend to have department- or division-focused. to implement an od-orientedadministrative innovation, management pursues not only autonomousdouble-loop learning but also institution building to make these changes are permanent. the assumption is that, once administrative innovations are successfully implemented and there are cultural changes to support them,these changes support and complement technical innovations. according to damanpour and evan (1984) , ‘‘an administrative innova- tion that brings structural changes has more impact in organizationalperformance than one can expect from technical innovation alone. admini-strative innovation supports and facilitates the adoption of technical inno-vations and improves the organization’s ability for institutional problem solving. administrative innovations can change an organization’s climate, communication, interdepartmental relations, personnel policies, and so on.in turn, they provide new opportunities for the initiation and adoption ofinnovations in the technical system’’ (p. 406). administrative innovation focuses on hierarchical levels that link the organization to its broader environment. once such institutional environ-mental issues are addressed, an organization is in a better position to adopttechnical innovations. the od approach to process innovation is autonomous double loop that follows a gradual change strategy that tends to be evolutionary in nature.the strategy has been popular in continuous improvement programs such astqm ( sisaye, 2001 ; sisaye & bodnar, 1994). tqm is based on the principles of education, training, and organizational learning to sustain continuousimprovement and change in organizational performance. tqm uses team-work, interdivisional cooperation, cultural change, and institutional devel-opment in planning and implementing successful process innovations. tqm’s approach of bottom-up participation and the use of change leaders (e.g., quality circles) have been advocated for production and qualityimprovement programs. its autonomous double-loop learning and manage-ment of change strategy is reﬂected in various accounting control systems,including abc. these innovations have a broader focus that tends to beprimarily incremental, involving procedural and operating technical informa-tion changes ( sisaye, 2005 ). new measurement and reporting techniques in management accounting could ﬁt into the technical category, for example, changing the basis for cost allocation within a unit or computerizing an existing data collection/analysis activity. accounting as an administrative tool involves planning, budgeting, internal control, and reporting systems that affect managerial communication andod and ot process innovation strategies 77decision making. accordingly, organizational contextual and process factors, including culture, shape the accounting system and the degree to whichplanned administrative innovative changes in accounting systems can beimplemented ( anderson & young, 1999 ;young, 1992 ). organizations utilize od intervention strategy to introduce planned administrative innovation programs. as mentioned earlier (chapter 2), apopular od intervention strategy in the 1990s was tqm, which wasimplemented to develop new operating methods to improve product qualityor streamline an administrative system, for example, personnel or accounting.however, unanticipated problems which can affect successful implementationof the innovation program are likely to prevail if these change programs donot involve all members of the organization, including the accounting staff, and if they do not have the full support of management as part of the overall organizational change strategy. brynjolfsson, renshaw, and alstyne (1997) had noted that targeted changes in a single system can be counter-productive. ‘‘it may be that nosingle isolated change can improve a process, but that a coordinated changecan’’ (p. 38). this approach calls for an ot strategy that requiressimultaneous change in all organizational systems. in essence, adminis-trative innovations, when systemic and integrative, can facilitate the ot process. because all systems are inter-related, an ot strategy change in one administrative subsystem affects all other organizational systems. 5.2. cell 4: organizational transformation organizational transformation refers to cell 4 of the innovation diffusion typology deﬁned in table 1. ot displays both an administrative extent and a systemic scope . the difference between od and ot lies along the scope dimension, where od has an autonomous scope and ot has an integrativeor systemic focus. in contrast to od, ot is present when the change istargeted at altering organizational structures as well as the individual andgroup members of the organization rather than focusing on accounting-related systems within a particular unit. in transformative change, new processes are conceptualized and formu- lated. there are many unknowns and uncertainties. accordingly, ‘‘trans- formative change requires the examination and shifting of long-standing assumptions, values, and beliefs. the broader or more transformative thescope of the change, the greater the number of assumptions or values to bechanged and the greater the degree of difﬁculty in effecting change’’organizational learning and process innovations 78(dibella, 2007, p. 237 ). transformation requires both attitudinal and behavior changes to accomplish long-term results. because learning occurs in small incremental and adaptive behavioral changes over time, ot likewiseevolves over time from an accumulation of small incremental changes (romanelli & tushman, 1994 ). ot innovations are, as the name suggests, characterized by major strategic changes in the organization’s direction. in other words, ot has a broader focus beyond the cultural change programs of od that are targeted tochanging individual employee behavior at division level (porras & silvers,1991). ot focuses on a broader/integrative scope of comprehensive changein organizational paradigm. it typically is the result of external forces instig-ating the change. when there are profound external environmental changes or instabilities, they create pressures for organizational adaptations to change. thesechanges could be associated with radical and revolutionary changes thatresult in organizational adaptations and transformations ( suarez & oliva, 2005). accordingly, ot creates conﬂict and requires power to overcome them to make these changes constructive. however, conﬂict gives rise to negoti-ations, discussions, and, in general, becomes dialectic in turn giving rise totransformation of knowledge and organization activities ( macpherson & jones, 2008, pp. 177–179 ). therefore, managing dialectic change as well as systematic continuity and discontinuity in the presence of power conﬂict and resistance to change islikely to produce synthesis by shifting the directives of change to thefunctional contributions of systems that could result in ot ( engestrom, kerosuo, & kajamaa, 2007 ). these changes in ot have been predominantly targeted to changing organizational structures as well as the individual andgroup members of the organization. 5.2.1. organizational transformation: deﬁnition porras and silvers (1991) viewed ot as promoting paradigmatic change thathelps the organization better to ﬁt into its current environment or to create amore desirable future environment. it focuses on organizational learningand a new vision for the organization (p. 54). the paradigm shift in ot affects the entire behaviors of the whole organization, thereby creating new organizational behavior and giving individual employees a new way ofviewing their job (p. 58). thus, ot intervention leads to both a change incognition and a commitment to radical change.od and ot process innovation strategies 79the ot process in organizations involves reciprocal exchange relation- ships to promote congruency and coherence among various units of the organization. congruence promotes stability and the alignment of resourcesto satisfy new requirements for system maintenance brought about by environmental changes ( bacharach, bamberger, & sonnenstuhl, 1996, pp. 477–478 ). barnett and carroll (1995) indicated that ot could involve a change in either content or process. when an organization changes its content, it has dramatically altered an element or all parts of its organizational structure,including mission, strategy, authority structure, and technology (see alsohannan & freeman, 1984 ). in particular, structural change entails changes in organizations’ divisions/departments and functions, job design, organiza- tion of work processes, and performance evaluation systems ( zamutto & o’connor, 1992 ). a process change, on the contrary, affects the way the organization operates within its environmental context, the sequence of activities, the decision-making and communication systems, as well as anyresistance encountered within the organization. both contents, includingstructural and process changes, have become instrumental in bringing abouttransformational change and development in organizations ( van de ven & poole, 1995 ). in ot, technological innovations such as bpr, when implemented, have made signiﬁcant structural changes in manufacturing processes – amongothers, in inventory and production scheduling management, deliverytechniques, product design, and quality improvements ( hammer, 1990 ; hammer & champy, 1993 ). bpr as an ot intervention strategy not only altered organizational systems but also resulted in downsizing and restructur-ing of organizations. bpr focused on process change within the context of the business of an organization. accordingly, ot involved several forms of restructuring,including downsizing, outsourcing, divestment or acquisitions as strategiesto increase shareholders’ value and wealth in the organization. thus,accounting knowledge and techniques are developed to pursue the objectivesof creating value and wealth to shareholders ( ezzamel, willmott, & worthington, 2008 ).hauser and papper (2007) concurred by suggesting that, because bpr is oriented to achieve speciﬁc and tangible structuralchanges, a context-based approach to bpr is constructed to achieve the objective of cost-saving devices and work-load reduction in speciﬁc ﬁrms and industries, for example, in manufacturing plants, as their studysuggested occurred in the automotive industries (p. 686). a study by herzog, polajnar, and tonchia (2007) of slovenian companies that have experienced and had undergone radical changes documented thatorganizational learning and process innovations 80bpr success in organizations was dependent on top management commit- ment and proactive engagement in the implementation process. when topmanagement was committed to change, they identiﬁed with bpr goals andparticipated in the formulation of strategies and their implementation (p. 5825). they also noted that educating employees about bpr and the use of teams for learning and adopting those changes was found to enhancethe likelihood of bpr’s success. moreover, information technology supportcontributed to bpr objectives by providing data (p. 5827). with the advent of new information technology, the implications of bpr’s resizing and work processes conﬁgurations are substantial foraccounting and internal control, particularly with those repetitive, routinefunctions dealing with the management of current assets and liabilities (sisaye, 1996 ; sisaye & bodnar, 1996). thus, the information technology revolution has brought a paradigm shift in how management views the accounting internal control function as supporting ot innovations. accordingly, accounting control changes are integrated into the context of structural changes within the organization at large. the new manufactur-ing environment thus required that the role of management control is tohelp develop techniques such as abc to realign accounting methods withperformance evaluation systems. organizations learned from the new technology, where supervisors and employees could cooperatively work together to use accounting information to achieve organizational ratherthan divisional goals. 5.2.2. ot and double-loop systemic-based radical change learning strategy ot accompanies the bpr approach, which follows double-loop systemic learning. davidson (1993) has suggested that bpr programs focus on business transformation (another term for ot), followed by organizational change. thus, the philosophy that ‘‘transformation focuses ﬁrst on businessprocesses and infrastructure, and second on organizational structures andsystems’’ prevailed (p. 77). in other words, business activities can bestructured to improve performance ‘‘and to then drive organizationalchange to align with the new business model’’ ( davidson, 1993, p. 77 ). as an example of the ot approach, bpr is a business transformation strategy that has systemic focus. bpr assumes that organizational innova-tions encompass structural changes that involve more than improvementsin operational performance ( sisaye, 2001 ). accordingly, the focus of the transformation systemic process is on the development of core competenciesod and ot process innovation strategies 81and infrastructure to support core business activities in a changing environment. organizations can build their ‘‘capabilities to introduceenhanced services and value-added processes that in turn can grow into newstand-alone businesses. the transformation philosophy focuses on the latent business growth potential of the core business represents a fundamental shift in management focus’’ ( davidson, 1993, p. 77 ). the ot approach thus recognizes the utility of open systems approach to institutionalize behavioraland structural strategies of change and the role of leadership to institutetransformational changes ( young et al., 1981 ). behery (2008) enumerated behavioral characteristics that are commonly associated with transformational leaders. they include behaviors that inspiretrust, loyalty, and respect from their followers. these leaders set high standards of performance for their employees. they encourage creativity and productivity within the organization. they focus on long-term goalsand motivate organizational members to achieve them (pp. 227–228). vera and crossan (2004) also described transformational leaders as exhibiting human relations-oriented behaviors that inspire others with their enthusiasmfor the vision of the organizations at large. these leaders are facilitators andinnovators. they are effective chief operating ofﬁcers (coos) who canbuild trust and dependability among their co-workers and followers. transformational leaders also promote change-oriented behaviors through inspiration and motivation. through their democratic andparticipatory management styles, they encourage double-loop learning.they portray charismatic leadership qualities that organizational membersassociate with. they encourage open discussions and forums. theysurround themselves with employees of diverse educational and experiencebackgrounds. they promote learning ‘‘within a context of change.’’ theyencourage new ideas, experiments and taking risks for innovations or managing radical changes ( behery, 2008, p. 230 ). they align and adapt the organizational culture to support learning new ideas or innovations. they exhibit an open-systems approach to inquiry that encourages change bychallenging existing norms and institutional behavior. they follow aprospectors’ strategy, that is, a proactive change approach to motivatefollowers to avoid resistance to change ( behery, 2008, pp. 231–233 ). ot is a strategic function. strategic leaders guide the transformational change and learning processes by initiating and directing the overall process of learning. according to vera and crossman (2004) , these strategic leaders exhibit both transformational and transactional leadership characteristics, depending on the situation and environment with which they areconfronted. they can also enhance the team/group learning process throughorganizational learning and process innovations 82encouragement and support, and, if necessary, by challenging those involved (pp. 227–230). strategic leaders understand that effective leadership is based on transactions exchange that involves merit award based on achieving predeﬁned standards of performance. this involves monitoring employees’ behavior and suggesting remedial actions and recommendations to reachthose targeted goals ( behery, 2008, p. 228 ).vera and crossman (2004) described strategic transactional leaders as task-oriented, focusing oncoordinating and monitoring the activities of employee performance. ingeneral, they are able to foster learning ‘‘within a context of stability’’ toreinforce mastery of specialized knowledge/competence to accomplish thework or the tasks by concentrating on organizational norms and culture. the strategy is to bring ‘‘incremental improvement in current ways of doing things.’’ they focus on meeting organizational goals. they pay close atten-tion to ‘‘deviations, mistakes, or irregularities; and take action to makecorrections’’ (p. 230). their focus is on efﬁciency and stability changes in asystematic pattern to promote continuity through incremental evolutionarychanges. they are able to adapt learning to ﬁt the existing organizationalculture by observing closely established norms and behaviors. they aredefenders of the current systems for maintaining rules and procedures to promote work efﬁciency, standardization and formalization of adminis- trative guidelines to minimize uncertainty of actions, decisions and risks(pp. 231–234). at the same time, they adopt incremental approaches tomanage their environmental changes and uncertainties to adapt currentoperating systems with the prevailing marketing conditions and competitiveenvironment. in management accounting, the implications of bpr for work process conﬁgurations are substantial particularly for accounting functions that are associated with routine and repetition. ot strategy complements bpr by utilizing abc and bsc to support performance measurement goals that aredesigned to achieve organizational rather than divisional goals. thus, theot-bpr business transformation strategy assumes that organizationalinnovations encompass structural changes that go beyond improvements inoperational performance ( sisaye, 2001 ). 5.2.3. the impact of information technology on ot the role of information technology is critical for ot-oriented processinnovations to take place in organizations. information occupies ‘‘a centralod and ot process innovation strategies 83role as the enabler of entirely new, cross-functional business processes. computer and communications technology enable organizations to breakthe old rules and conventions that dictated the design of business processes’’(gulden & reck, 1992, p. 16 ). information technology can serve ‘‘to increase ﬂexibility, to improve communication, and to integrate differentfunctions and organizations’’ ( dixon, arnold, heineke, kinn, & mulligan, 1994, p. 105 ). accounting as an economic information system thus becomes a cornerstone in business process innovations. accounting also provides ﬁnancial information that supports process innovation and quality improvement programs. as information managers,accountants monitor information on organizational performance thatrequires improvement, assess the need for functional integration of the accounting systems that tie the organizational units together, and appraise the capability of the human, ﬁnancial, and technological resources to carryout business innovation. accounting innovations are examples of bothod and ot process innovation strategies that can change organizationalcultures and systems. 5.3. organizational development and transformation approaches in management accounting innovations od and ot frameworks both approach accounting innovations asadministrative innovations, although they differ on the scope of theinnovation. scope is related to the breadth of organizational structures,management policies, and administrative systems included in the innovationprocess (see chapter 3). while od innovation intervention is limited to a single organizational unit or function, ot focuses on changing several units or functions with interdependent operating activities. accounting innovation can either follow an od or an ot innovation strategy, depending on the scope and the magnitude of change inmanagement accounting and reporting systems. the magnitude of theinnovation may depend on the complexity of organizational structures andthe urgency with which the innovation is perceived to be required to becomean organization-wide strategy. the focus of accounting innovation initially may be limited to a single unit or department (od) if the innovation is complex or is signiﬁcantly different than existing practices. however, if theneed for change is perceived to be urgent, the innovation is much more likelyinitially to be implemented organization-wide (ot).organizational learning and process innovations 84at the initial decision to adopt innovation, the scope of accounting innovation, like any other innovation strategy, is generally limited to a single unit or department. at the departmental level, bureaucratic structuresplay an important role in the adoption decision. in centralized and formal organizations that adopt accounting innovations, the likelihood that these innovations will be implemented is higher than in decentralized and lessformal organizations. decentralized organizations have the autonomy andﬂexibility to slow down or abandon accounting innovation implementation,if they feel it is relevant to the protection of their divisional interests. inaccounting, while vertical differentiation has more impact on the adoptiondecision, it is the centralized structure that is needed to support imple-mentation of accounting innovation. thus, od and ot interventions play complementary roles in both the adoption/initiation or implementation and diffusion/dissemination decisions. while ot intervention is required inthe adoption/implementation process, od intervention is critical in thediffusion/initiation decisions. organizational structures may create impediments to diffusion of innovations in organizations. accounting innovations that involve admin-istrative control changes are more likely to be resisted than technicalautonomous innovations that occur in manufacturing and production technologies, for example, ansari and euske (1987) . however, if these technical changes are successful, they can grow incrementally into administrative innovations that have a systemic effect organization-wide.such has been the case of the compensation system described in banker et al. (1996) . initially, the compensation system tended to focus on routine operations at the outlet level and had the characteristics of a technicalinnovation. however, its successful dissemination transformed the technicalfocus into an administrative dimension and affected the management of compensation systems at several outlets throughout the organization. the banker et al. (1996) study reinforced the importance of organiza- tional structures in the diffusion of administrative innovations, particularly accounting changes, which are highly signiﬁcant in performance evaluationand reporting systems. for example, malmi (1999) found that finnish subsidiaries of multi-national ﬁrms were among the early adopters of abc.he suggested that, when headquarters forced an adoption decision at thesubsidiary level, this, in effect, dictated/facilitated adoption. it allowed central management to follow an od gradual-autonomous learning strategy and to experiment with innovation at a unit or division level. this odapproach affords central management the opportunity to understand betterhow innovation can best be introduced into a unit. when innovation isod and ot process innovation strategies 85successful in the initial unit(s), it not only reinforces management’s plan to move forward with the innovation, but it ultimately increases theexpectation that the innovation can be adopted successfully by otherdivisions. this gradual adoption and diffusion process is consonant with an ot strategy of double-loop systemic learning. the systemic-integrative approach allows central management to diffuse the innovation to otherunits within the organization with reduced structural resistance and fewerdisruptions to normal operating activities. thus, od and ot intervention strategies can be seen to play complemen- tary roles in both the adoption/implementation and diffusion/disseminationdecisions of accounting innovations. the banker et al. (1996) andmalmi (1999) studies support the conclusion that, while od intervention is critical in the diffusion/dissemination decision, ot intervention is required in theadoption/implementation process organization-wide. the successes of otorganization-wide innovations are related directly to the successful imple-mentation of od innovations at the divisional level. therefore, od and otinterventions can have broader implications on the adoption and diffusion ofaccounting innovations. they both pursue complementary learning strategiesfor management accounting innovations: autonomous double loop for odand systemic double loop for ot. accordingly, the autonomous change reﬂects the adoption (stage 1) in od and the systemic change displayed in diffusion (stage 2) of organizational learning and innovation strategies thatare discussed in chapter 6.organizational learning and process innovations 86chapter 6 organizational learning and process innovations: anintegrated framework in this chapter, we integrate the literature on organizational learning and the sociology of adoption and diffusion of process innovations. we develop an integrative framework that relates this literature to that of managementaccounting. 6.1. an overview of the literature on organizational learning the literature on organizational learning is very rich and complex. althoughmost research on learning suggests that it involves individual cognitive,cultural, social, and institutional changes and development, there are slightvariations in terms of the number of factors various authors associate with these changes. we discuss the work of several authors as providing a contextual framework for viewing learning as involving both the adoptionand diffusion of innovations. for example, lawrence, maueus, kyck, and kleysen (2005) viewed learning as having four components which they referred to as the four i’s oforganizational learning. these include: (1) intuiting , which arises from individuals when they develop new knowledge or new insights from theirexperiences; (2) interpreting those experiences into speciﬁc actions; (3)integrating actions, knowledge, or insights into shared understanding through mutual coordination and sharing; and, (4) institutionalizing learning by embedding their new knowledge and insights into through organizationsystems, procedures, rules, structures, actions, policies, and strategies. 87similarly, lopez et al. (2005) identiﬁed four components of organiza- tional learning which are similar to but not identical to lawrence et al.’s (2005) . these include (1) acquisition of knowledge from internal and external resources; (2) distribution or dissemination of knowledge among organizational members; (3) interpretation of knowledge for use in decision- making; and, (4) organizational memory for the purpose of developing rulesand procedures to store knowledge for future use in designing systems,improving administrative procedures, supporting organizational adaptationand ﬁt to environmental changes, particularly in turbulent environments. by contrast, chan, cooper, and tzortzopoulos (2005) listed ﬁve groupings, that they label facets of organizational learning. the ﬁrst arecontextual facets that include environmental uncertainty, task structure, and leadership commitment. the second group of factors is related to the policies the organization utilizes to facilitate learning in the organization.these include outlining the steps that management uses formally orinformally to promote learning through cultural change, recognition, andreward. the third group addresses psychological factors such as riskavoidance and organizational commitment. the fourth aspect is cultural,including those norms and behaviors that promote transparency, integrity,issue orientation, inquiry, and accountability. lastly, the ﬁfth facet includes structural factors referring to the organizational learning mechanisms of integration where the people learn while performing the tasks; or, non-integration, where the person learning is not necessarily the individualperforming the tasks (pp. 749–750). in general, the structural facets supportthe creation, sharing, and application of knowledge to those tasks thatimprove organizational performance (p. 751). on the contrary, jerez-gomez, cespedes-lorente, and valle-cabrera (2005) focus on where the learning takes place. they described learning as consisting of three dimensions: individual, group and structural. they refer to individuals as having cognitive (psychological aspects) behavioral dimensions/assump-tions, group as having sociological behavioral dimensions/assumptions, andstructural as having organizational behavioral dimensions/assumptions. jerez-gomez et al. (2005) suggested that in this context learning is integral toorganizational behavior and can become a strategic resource for planning andmanaging organizations. accordingly, learning is embedded in organizational,structural, and cultural processes that impact individual and collective knowledge. learning, that is, new knowledge, is interpreted and shared by members, and is interpreted and stored in organizational memory in the formof rules, procedures, and policies. when knowledge is interpreted, it is shared,integrated, and disseminated/transferred to members and groups within theorganizational learning and process innovations 88organization. thus according to jerez-gomez et al. (2005), learning involves both acquisition of knowledge, sharing, and transferring them to organiza-tional members, and collectively integrating them into part of the organiza-tional culture and norms. jerez-gomez et al. (2005) argued that, when learning increases an organization’s ability to process knowledge, organizations now have thecapability to acquire, interpret, and integrate new knowledge that canmodify individual and group behaviors collectively to direct their effortstoward improving organizational performance. they also suggested that theorganization’s ability to learn is facilitated by four dimensions: managerialcommitment, systems perspective, openness and experimentation, andknowledge transfer and integration (p. 716). managerial commitment refers to the support of management and the provision of structural arrangements conducive for the creation, adoption, and transfer of knowledge. inaddition, there has to be a system that (a) provides members with acommon or shared identity in order for them to rally around the organi-zation as a series of systems that are interdependent and (b) allows them todevelop relationships, have common understandings, and integrate knowl-edge. openness and experimentation mean that, for learning to occur, theremust be a willingness among members to accept new ideas and experiments openly to promote creativity and a desire to take risks. when this knowledge is integrated, it is accepted as having desirable practical applicationsand practices for implementing innovative changes that can be transferredand disseminated (jerez-gomez et al., 2005, p. 717). ultimately, it isexpected that the learning outcome leads to solving problems which theorganization faces and addresses to improve competitive performance. inorganizations, learning can lead to successful outcomes when there isintegration of individual knowledge, exchange among members, coordina- tion to achieve organizational goals, and direction for common objectives (jerez-gomez et al., 2005, pp. 719–721). these various approaches to organization learning suggest that learning is both an individual and a group process. yeo (2007) provided an integrated view that examined learning as a process where individuals provide theirbehaviors and actions to promote organizational adaptation to the changingenvironment; that is, learning contributes to improving individual cognitionby providing new insights. in addition, it has the potential to change organization members’ behaviors through dialogue and inquiry to provide a common or shared vision that enables the organization to detect, reduce,and correct errors. we have applied the individual, group, and organiza-tional perspectives to our examination of the adoption and diffusionorganizational learning and process innovations 89dimensions of learning. the literature, in general, suggests that organiza- tional learning involves individual cognitive (psychological aspects) andgroup and organizational (sociological dimensions) changes. 6.1.1. psychological dimensions of learning: individual cognitive changes when it comes to individual cognitive change, organizational learning hasbeen deﬁned as a process that has the potential to change individualbehaviors and actions. individual learning involves the acquisition ofknowledge and information by individual members of the organization, and their effective forms of communication (oral and/or written) which, over time, evolve into organizational practices. this process involves both‘‘acquisition’’ of knowledge by individuals and ‘‘participation’’ byorganization members. elkjaer (2004) referred to this as two ways of organizational learning (p. 419). the third method addresses inquiry andreﬂective thinking about ideas and practices. it involves synthesis, that is,analysis and inquiry about knowledge where members are expected toacquire knowledge and participate in communities of social inquiry. this is referred as reﬂective learning (p. 421). these three processes indicate differences among organizational members in their work, life, andexperiences. it also recognizes differences in members’ roles in organiza-tional transactions and the implications these changes have on theirafﬁliations to the organization ( elkjaer, 2004, pp. 430–431 ). brown and duguid (2001) elaborated the relationship between individual, group, and social learning. they suggested that learning has a socioculturaldimension that involves relationships among individual and group learning, and identiﬁcation with the organization cultures and social systems. learning requires both the acquisition of knowledge by the individual andindividual’s identity. they used as an example that of a physicist, who hasthe acquired or learned expertise/knowledge after many years of formaltraining and practice but, at the same time, needs to have a social identity,that is, being recognized as a physicist by others with whom she/he interacts. brown and duguid (2001) argued that, when someone is recognized as a ‘‘learned person’’, that is, one with knowledge and/or skills in a given domain, he or she is credited with possessing ‘‘the ability to act in the world in socially recognized ways’’ (p. 200). members of an organization possessexpertise in different areas and at different levels. there exists a signiﬁcantdifference among physicists in the degree of shared knowledge that isorganizational learning and process innovations 90acquired and attributed to some as specialists with expertise training, while others with broader backgrounds are referred to as generalists. thus thelearning process is said to be held collectively by organizational members. accordingly, knowledge in organizations exists among individuals in their areas of specializations/expertise. it is necessary that the organizationintegrate the members’ knowledge to maintain the organizational capabilityand competitive advantage to respond to dynamic environment. grant (1996) articulated the role of knowledge as organizational resources where multiple knowledge bases are jointly coordinated. ‘‘integration of specialistknowledge to perform a discrete productive task is the essence oforganizational capability , which is deﬁned as a ﬁrm’s ability to perform repeatedly a productive task that relates either directly or indirectly to a ﬁrm’s capacity for creating value through affecting the transformation of inputs into outputs. most organizational capabilities require integrating thespecialist knowledge bases of a number of individuals’’ (p. 377; italics inoriginal). thus, the success of an organization depends on the integration ofindividual and group knowledge to develop a competitive advantage and toachieve improved performance. 6.1.2. sociological dimensions of learning: group and organizational changes learning not only is a process that involves cognitive change throughknowledge acquisition and past actions of individuals, but it also is a socialprocess that involves adaptation to changes in behaviors of individuals inone’s group as well as those of other groups and organizations. these adaptive strategic changes include both external and internal behavioral changes among individuals and groups within the context oforganizational learning, and they may be either incremental or radical.bapuji and crossan (2004) suggested that, when learning is internal, organizations learn from their experiences. when it is external, they learnfrom others, particularly, competitors’ past experiences or the industry atlarge. they can learn through inter-organizational alliances and cooperationwith other ﬁrms through joint ventures or research and development(pp. 403–404). learning from others improves existing organizational practices. the new knowledge acquired expands the organization’s knowl- edge into new arenas and areas to promote better understanding amongmembers, to detect and correct errors, and to improve organizationalpractices ( lumpkin & litchtenstein, 2005 ).organizational learning and process innovations 91according to lopez et al. (2005) , organizational learning can provide a competitive advantage for the organization. it can improve organizational performance. the new knowledge, that is, the learning that occurs, increasesemployees’ abilities to be innovative and to make decisions that better align organizational capabilities with the changing environmental conditions. organizations then are better able to undertake new initiatives, primarilytechnological, that impact their business performance. in this way learningpromotes new behaviors and knowledge that leads to better performance, inother words, to superior outcomes of products and services that attract newcustomers and retain existing clients. in general, learning improves theoverall performance of an organization over time. bryant and terborg (2008) suggested that when groups and teams experience learning, they share knowledge through peer mentoring relation-ships’’ (p. 25). mentoring fosters knowledge sharing that provides anorganization with a competitive advantage. in general, organizations ableto reinforce peer mentoring with training increase knowledge creationand sharing that becomes instrumental in improving the organization’scompetitiveness. organizational learning may also arise internally from organizational experiences or its past history and experiences; or, externally by learning from the diffusion of innovations. for example, learning can occur through government mandates to correct problems in situations involving productrecalls. haunschild and rhee (2004) noted that, when organizations make an effort to learn from their experiences with product recalls, learning canultimately lead to favorable outcomes resulting in fewer errors or mistakes inproduct and services. this is because knowledge acquired from the negativeexperience leads to ‘‘better product design or improved organizationalprocesses that will reduce the incidence of errors’’ (p. 1546). in other words, when past results, for example, recalls fail to meet organizational standards, organizations will explore possible solutions, leading to learning fromexperience. this is an example of voluntary learning to solve a problem.sometimes, it is possible that ‘‘these voluntary recalls may come fromincremental organizational procedures that increase the likelihood ofannouncing a voluntary recall’’ ( haunschild & rhee, 2004, p. 1557 ). usually in products with multi components, a defect in one part affects the others. ifthis problem is detected internally, it reduces involuntary learning. in other words, it is internally induced rather than externally forced, for example, mandated recalls that reduce likely recurrences of errors that precipitaterecall. over time, it is hoped that the cumulative effect of past failures willorganizational learning and process innovations 92generate and promote learning to reduce/eliminate future errors and, thereby, eliminate externally mandated requirements. however, in group contexts, politics and power may impact the ability of knowledge sponsors to inﬂuence thoughts and actions of others. lawrence et al. (2005) suggested that ideas that are translated, interpreted and integ- rated at the group level need to be championed to be disseminated. thesechampions’ acceptance of new behaviors and their associated power basesaffect the integration and institutionalization of knowledge within the groupand the organization. the power to reward particular interpretations ofknowledge and penalize others affects the adoption and construction ofknowledge. when learning is said to be institutionalized, it is embedded inthe organizational systems, structures, rules, manuals, procedures, policies, and strategies. resistance to change has been addressed and overcome by innovation champions or managers. a power that is based on domination(hierarchical power) is effective in the politics of institutionalization oflearning and innovation (p. 186). in addition, lawrence et al. (2005) noted that political processes or organizational learning involves the inﬂuence toascertain the ambiguity of interpretation associated with learning. this maynecessitate the use of force to accomplish integration of collective action,domination to overcome resistance to change, and discipline to support expertise in acquiring knowledge (pp. 188–189). learning thus is more than a simple process of calculation. it involves persuasion, command, or inﬂuence in the social interaction process. accordingly, managers’ interventions can inﬂuence organizational learningthrough motivation and the use of incentives to identify and address organ-izational problems and possibly suggest remedial actions; for example, toreduce costs, improve production, among others. arthur and huntley (2005) gave examples of gain-sharing, where organizations learn from experiences of employee suggestions for managing performance by reducingproduction costs. as workers’ experience increased over time, per unit costsdeclined correspondingly. arthur and huntley (2005) elaborated gain- sharing as deliberate learning strategies to acquire knowledge by encoura-ging employees to suggest ways of reducing costs or improving performanceformally through ﬁnancial rewards and monetary incentives. this experi-ence-based learning is associated with work reduction in per unit costs.when accompanied by gain-sharing, the decline in unit costs was substantial. over time, employees’ knowledge based suggestions can reduce per unit costs, but the effect of ‘‘cumulative knowledge depreciates overtime’’. however, when organization learning practices introduce ‘‘a plannedorganizational learning and process innovations 93performance improvement program such as gain-sharing’’, it contributes to improved performance ( arthur & huntley, 2005, p. 1166 ). in fact, this ‘‘suggestion based knowledge’’ will depreciate over time unless there is acontinuous stream of new suggestions that support gain-sharing (p. 1166). otherwise, decline in unit costs revert to pre-sharing levels. managing ‘‘the knowledge depreciation rate through discovering the causes and takingactions are critical for the long term success of an organization’’ ( arthur & huntley, 2005, p. 1167 ). gain-sharing thus becomes practice-based learning for the purpose of coordinating shared knowledge across the organizations’various units/divisions or businesses. when learning is practice-based, it involves social activities that will promote applied learning. there are organized collective activities for members and shared knowledge learned within these social contexts. there is ‘‘co-orientation’’ where learning is interactive ( macpherson & jones, 2008, pp. 177–178 ). the ability of an organization to coordinate knowledge in its various functions provides a competitive advantage ( brown & duguid, 2001). to this effect, cross and berdrow (2003) concluded that ‘‘organiza- tional learning is seen as a means to develop capabilities that are valued bycustomers, are difﬁcult to imitate, and hence contribute to competitiveadvantage’’ (p. 1089). they also noted that when organizations undergoing strategic renewal and managers are brought into the organization from the outside is likely to result in changes in the organization that, in turn,necessitate changes in cognition and behaviors at the individual, group, andorganizational levels that support organizational learning (p. 1102). thus,the strategic renewal learning process leads to changes in an organization’ssystems, structures, strategies, and policies. according to antonacopoulou, ferdinand, grace, and easterby-smith (2005) , organizational renewal involves interaction and negotiation of order and disorder. as organizations develop capabilities to manage and coordinateresources, there is a renewal of competency. it integrates change, learning, andorganizational dynamics. the change will affect the operating conditions oforganizational activities. thus, renewal is an ongoing process to restructureand stabilize an organization’s operations. however, any change of asigniﬁcant magnitude can also involves what antonacopoulou et al. (2005) referred to as disorder as the organization works its way through the learningprocess. the learning process may well include the need to experiment with different approaches in response to its environment and its competitors. in this context, organizations learn from their competitive environments to align,restructure, and improve their practices to remain in business. organizationallearning can become a resource to improve performance and competition.organizational learning and process innovations 94dynamic capability involves the internal positioning and alignment of organizational resources to coordinate renewal and learning and to make itadaptable to external environmental changes in markets and by its competitors. dynamic capabilities address change in organizations to improve the organizations’ ability to integrate and align resources to meet environmentalchanges. learning can also become instrumental when organizations learnfrom the external experiences of other organizations’ cooperative venturesand alliances within the same industry or market ( bapuji & crossan, 2004, pp. 403–405 ). thus, organizational learning can facilitate innovations and implementation of change programs, including improved informationsystems management (lin & lee, 2005). consequently, there is no question that managing information technology (it) is important and plays a key role in assisting the organization to attaina competitive advantage. it is an invisible asset that collects, analyzes, andreports information on markets, customers, competitors, and organizationalresources. within the context of it, tippins and sohi (2003) viewed organizational learning as a process of acquiring new knowledge. it‘‘consists of four components: information, acquisition, informationdissemination, shared interpretation, and development of organizationalmemory’’ (p. 749). information acquisition deals with the gathering of information from internal (employees) and external (customers, markets) sources. dissemination deals with distribution or sharing of informationwithin the organization. shared interpretation includes the process throughwhich the information is interpreted, discussed, shared, and, ultimately,understood. the shared information is then ‘‘stored’’ in the organizationalmemory and is archived through procedures, declarations, or manuals. thus, the it process supports the process of generating organizational learning and organizational competency. learning organizations that have it strategies for customers and markets are better situated to provide the information managers need to introduce desirable innovations. thus, in thelong run, the process of it beneﬁts can enable a ﬁrm to improveperformance when it is used in conjunction with other organizationalresources ( tippins & sohi, 2003, pp. 751–756 ). in addition, lin and lee (2005) afﬁrmed that organizational learning factors related to staff trainingand technical expertise accompanied by greater knowledge acquisition canfacilitate the introduction and adoption of innovations within it such as those associated with e-business inventions that transforms the overall organizational operational activities. according to hanvanich, sivakumar, and hult (2006) , the impact of organizational learning is on organizational outcomes related to improvedorganizational learning and process innovations 95performance. process innovations are moderated by environmental and market competitive conditions, whether the environment is dynamic andturbulent, or static and stable. there are positive relationships in learning,organizational performance, and innovative behaviors in business environ- ments characterized by high market volatility and technological changes. environmental turbulence places greater emphasis on the ability oforganizations to explore new avenues, mechanisms, and opportunities toserve their stakeholders. the learning experience suggests that, over time, organizations acquire expertise that enables them to operate/produce better and faster, with theresult that there is a decline in production and manufacturing costs.nevertheless, organizations have differences in their abilities to acquire and generate knowledge, and at the same time, learn from their competitors. organizations choose to select those activities or routines that generate thebest results from learning. the ﬁrm can then select and distribute thoseroutines or rules that are effective in dealing with speciﬁc environmentalchanges. if there is interdependence of activities, the ability of organizations to isolate poor performances and determine appropriate actions to correctthem is more complex. therefore, learning tends to be less effective when there are interdependencies and any changes involve higher transaction costs (williamson, 1975 ). as the degree of interdependence among organization functions increases, it becomes more difﬁcult to determine where the prob-lems are and which routines or rules are appropriate to address the problems.as a result, in this situation organizations simultaneously change or experi-ment through trial and error until they ﬁnd appropriate corrective mecha-nisms for the observed deﬁciencies. during the learning process, theirperformance may decline. it improves when they ﬁnd effective routines and solutions that yield better outcomes/results. the organization’s ability to detect and correct error diminishes when there are interdependencies thatcause organizational inertia ( hannan & freeman, 1984 ) and the presence of interdependence interrupts the learning process and the diffusion ofinformation by limiting the ability of one of the individual interdependentunits of the organization to engage in actions independently. if the environment is volatile, the ability of organizations with highly interdependent activities to learn and adapt declines further. as a result, their performance level is disadvantaged in the short term. in other words, the structure of the organization affects the ability of ﬁrms to learn andadapt at the very time the dynamic environments makes the greatest demandon them (e.g., see rowe et al., 2008 ). thus, while interdependence isorganizational learning and process innovations 96intended to increase organizational efﬁciencies and minimize costs, it decreases the ability to maximize organizational learning outcomes andthereby achieving improved performance in the short term. thus, learning is an evolutionary process where an organization’s ability to develop, organize, innovate, adopt, and disseminate knowledge dependson both internal resource capabilities and external environmental factors.organizations that are able to adapt to both internal and external factorsare capable of adopting and diffusing knowledge to improve theirperformance and as the result are able to obtain a market advantage overtheir competitors. 6.2. the two stages of organizational learning: adoption and diffusion schulz (2001) suggested that the learning process usually follows a sequence of steps/stages that reﬂect how the sub-unit’s/organization’s experienceinﬂuences the process by which knowledge is adopted and disseminated topeers and supervising units. he argued that organizational learning and change usually follows an evolutionary staged growth in terms of the ‘‘number of processes that create new knowledge or modify existingknowledge’’ (p. 663). these processes start with how knowledge is gatheredor obtained (codiﬁed), followed by the extent to which it is analyzed(explored), and ultimately communicated (selectively diffused). schulz (2001) described the process as having two inter-related stages. the ﬁrst stage, acquisition/production (adoption), consists of the gathering ofknowledge/information, its codiﬁcation, and exploration. it is followed by the second stage, namely, the dissemination/distribution (diffusion) processes (p. 676). nevertheless, when changes in the organization’s external environment persist and the organization faces a crisis, this can overcome management’sresistance to change and accentuate the need for organizational learning,and for proactive change and adaptation strategies of development andtransformation. when the organization recognizes the need to innovate tosolve a problem, speciﬁc innovations are championed by opinion leaders who both perceive the existence of the problem and ascertain what they consider to be a viable solution. these opinion leaders typically areexecutives or front-line managers who communicate and champion theinnovation to lower level managers and/or employees. this represents theorganizational learning and process innovations 97environmental contexts /xrhombusexternal /head2rightcompetition /head2rightpolitical systems /head2righteconomic conditions /head2rightregulatory issues /head2rightinternational conditions /xrhombusinternal /head2rightorganizational structures /square4centralization /square4decentralization /head2rightlearning /square4single loop /square4double loop /head2rightextent/square4technical /square4administrative /head2rightscope /square4autonomous /square4systemicnecessitates preconditions for  accounting innovationsexamples of management accounting  innovations /xrhombuscost allocation /xrhombusjust-in-time /xrhombusactivity based casting (abc) /xrhombusbalanced scorecard (bsc) /xrhombusstrategic cost accounting organizations recognize the  need to innovate to  address the problemchampioning the need for innovations /xrhombusprospectors/leaders /xrhombusfollowers coordinating with potential  providers of innovationssuppliers of innovations/xrhombusaccounting firms /xrhombusacademic institutions /xrhombustextbook publishers /xrhombusindustry/corporations /xrhombusmanagement consulting firms diffusion of  innovationsdiffusion strategies/outcome /xrhombusdiffusion of successful innovations /head2rightdivision/unit levels /head2rightorganizational wide /head2righttrial and error lessons /head2rightorganizational learning  approaches /xrhombusadaptation strategies for failed  innovations /head2rightlessons learned /head2rightfeedback/forward  learning strategies lessons learned feedback/forward learning strategiesfactors facilitating the  implementation process /xrhombuspresence of innovation  champions /xrhombusorganizational size /xrhombusprofitability /xrhombusenvironmental attributes /xrhombusinnovation congruency /xrhombusorganizational/top  management commitmentadoption of innovations fig. 6.1 . the adoption–diffusion processes of innovations in management accounting systems sources : adapted from sandberg (2007) andwejnert (2002) .organizational learning and process innovations 98ﬁrst stage of learning (adoption) illustrated in fig. 6.1 . in those instances where the problem is sufﬁciently severe or the organization has not been able to identify any speciﬁc innovation/knowledge required for a viablesolution, organizations may identify an outsider (e.g., a consultant) as a champion (see rowe et al., 2008, 2011 ). the implementation of a successful organization-wide innovation requires a second stage of learning and diffusion. this occurs when managers/ employees accept and implement the innovations at the division/unit level;the second stage of process innovation (diffusion) has taken place within thesub-unit. these two stages relate to the two questions we identiﬁed in theintroduction and in chapter 1. stage 1 considers why certain innovationsare more likely to be implemented. stage 2 helps us to understand why the dissemination of accounting innovations within the organization is more successful in some instances than others. fig. 6.1 describes the process whereby an organization becomes aware of the need to change (innovate), and then later, how it disseminates (diffuses)the innovation to other parts/all of the organization. it traces how theadoption–diffusion process is shaped by various activities in whichindividuals, change agents, and organizations participate in the learning/innovation processes. accordingly, the learning process is analogous to the two phases described by attewell (1992) : awareness of the innovation and acquisition of the know-how required to implement the new process. infig. 6.1 , the term ‘‘diffusion’’ refers to the dissemination of the innovation within the (intra)organization rather than its spread to other (inter)organizations. the experiences of safety-kleen with abc and abmillustrates the two stages of innovation, where, at stage one, the adoption ofabc was limited to a single division-wide intervention, making it an oddouble-loop autonomous learning strategy. the success of abc leads to stage 2 during which the innovation was disseminated or diffused to other divisions in the organization, making it abm and double-loop systemic learning. as described in fig. 6.1 , the diffusion of an innovation within an organization begins with its identiﬁcation by champions who obtain thesupport of their top management and acquire the information they need toinﬂuence others (followers) to adopt it. thus, information and communica-tion are critical to moving the innovation forward and in determining thelength of the time lag between early and late adopters. kumar and krishnan (2002) discussed two types of lead–lag differences in the introduction of new technology among countries. the ﬁrst process,which they identiﬁed as ‘‘waterfall strategy’’, pertained to the time or theorder of entry when the diffusion process was introduced. this strategyorganizational learning and process innovations 99follows the lead–lag approach, in which the lead country (or organization) adopts the new technology, and the lag country (or organization) follows(p. 328). the second process, referred to as the ‘‘sprinkler strategy’’, involvesinnovations which could be ‘‘simultaneously introduced’’ in multiple countries or organizations. in this case there is no lead–lag effect and no signiﬁcant social, cultural, and economic differences among the adopters(p. 328). most diffusion research suggests that dissemination occurs whenthere is a lead–lag difference between countries and/or organizations(weinjert, 2002 ). the lead–lag approach is predominant view in research on diffusion in social and economic development. it also is referred as the‘‘trickle-down’’ effect. in social and cultural change programs, the ‘‘trickle-down’’ effect has been generally accepted by researchers to explain social and economic development ( leagans & loomis, 1971 ). katz (1999) related the ‘‘trickle-down’’ effect to the predominant theory of the s curve in diffusion research. the assumption is that it is ‘‘true, there is the general s curve in the adoption of innovations and its moresophisticated elaborations; there is the general rule of trickle-down fromhigher to lower status; and there is the apparent need for reinforcement frompeers prior to adoption’’ (p. 147). katz (1999) argued that there is no general theory or framework of diffusion except for ‘‘a set of tools for making generalizations possible y’’ (p. 147). in diffusion research, it is assumed that ideas or practices are communicated through networks or leaders who promote these values to adopting individuals and groups. in addition inorganizations, the trickle-down process may also proceed from superiors tosubordinates. in any case, diffusion is reciprocal and involves a two-wayprocess. despite the voluntary tone of the above discussion, in practice theprocess of diffusion is not necessarily always a voluntary process. it can alsobe imposed by forcing new ideas or culture to change existing patterns of social life. this can occur when consultants are hired by the organization’s leadership or a strong, politically powerful leader(s) in the organizationsupports a particular innovation. in general, diffusion involves an ‘‘imitation’’ process that assumes persuasion, command, or inﬂuence in the social interaction process. byimitation, we are referring to the copying of innovations and/or obeying of‘‘request’’ of the champion by interconnected individuals and groups. it alsocan be a social contagion process where word of mouth plays an important role in the diffusion process. in other words, the adoption of innovation entails a social process where communication, persuasion, and interactionwith opinion leaders facilitate the process. this is because opinion leadersare sources of social inﬂuence. they can identify a subset of initial potentialorganizational learning and process innovations 100adopters who then promote the adoption of a particular innovation within the community. opinion leaders who are credible, accessible, and who havethe means of advancing new practices and ideas are able to provide supportand inﬂuence for dissemination of the innovation. they are early adopters who have tried the innovation, have been successful, and can inﬂuence its acceptance by subsequent or later adopters. opinion leaders can function aschange agents by facilitating ‘‘the task of transmitting information’’(gatingon & robertson, 1985, p. 860 ). in most instances, potential opinion leaders can be recruited from adopters who have been successful in the pastand therefore have credibility. although communication is the key to an innovation’s diffusion, adoption of the innovation in a particular organization may entail a certain degree of modiﬁcation of the innovation, or what dearing (2009) terms as ‘‘intervention adaptation ’’ (p. 513; italics in original). over time, there are incremental adjustments in innovations designed to accommodate the organization’s work environments, and cultural contexts. adoption, whenplanned and implemented, makes an innovation program in intermediaryorganizations such as public health or agricultural practices, for example,more effective and instrumental. according to rogers (1995) , the diffusion framework involves inter- personal communication or spread of information in the social system.frenzel and grupp (2009) further advanced this view by arguing that, in diffusion, there is ‘‘communication of information about the innovation asbeing crucial for its adoption’’ (p. 44). personal inﬂuence may account forthe spread of innovation. yet, some successful innovations are adopted laterbecause the information was either not quickly disseminated or discovereduntil later. if, on the contrary, the dissemination of information aboutinnovations occurs only when they became ‘‘epidemic’’, it means adoption would more than likely be infectious for both the communication and the adoption of the innovation. frenzel and grupp (2009) suggested that the core assumption of the epidemic model is that innovations are likely to beadopted when targeted populations are ‘‘infected’’ by the innovation when itreaches them (p. 45). this is comparable to the information contagionapproach where friendship ties, proximity, and the characteristics ofcomparable segments of a group or community facilitate interaction andcommunication for the spread of the innovation. thus, personal inﬂuence of various types forms one of the basic components of the diffusion theory. the rate of spread of diffusion isdependent on personal inﬂuence. among the factors which affect thecharacter of the opinion leader are: relevance of personal inﬂuence, intent oforganizational learning and process innovations 101inﬂuence, personal characteristics of the opinion leader, the form (verbal or non-verbal) of the communication medium, the direction of the inﬂuence(‘‘opinion seeking’’ or ‘‘opinion giving’’), and the network process(‘‘similarity among individuals’’) adopting the innovation ( gatingon & robertson, 1985, p. 855 ). in general, personal interactions are more likely to prevail when there is a social attractiveness; among individuals who possessthe same behavioral attributes. accordingly, there are personal character-istics that are related or based on ‘‘higher income, higher education,younger, more socially mobile, more favorable attitudes toward risk, greatersocial participation and higher opinion leadership’’ associated withinnovativeness ( gatingon & robertson, 1985, p. 861 ). weinjert (2002) related social-contagion effect, personal ties and character- istics to the cultural community approach of adoption and diffusion, if thesebehaviors are accepted by organization members and groups. she identiﬁedthree factors in the institutionalization of behaviors that are consideredacceptable policies and standardized practices, namely, (1) global adoption oftechnologies by multi-national corporations, (2) inter-connectedness of theworld community through advanced communication systems and media,which render the process of diffusion universal, and (3) the transfer of processinnovations to create comparable societal structures (p. 315). she also noted that computer and internet usage globally is considered essential for modernity, growth, and development. the mass media can promote thediffusion of technology and advance its institutionalization and globalizationby facilitating adoption and diffusion processes (pp. 316–317). katz (1999) also noted that ‘‘diffusion also is facilitated by a compatible social structure’’ (p. 150). diffusion can succeed when new ideas areintroduced in a society that has ‘‘a compatible value systems (contraceptionhas a harder time in catholic countries) and compatible media (print serves participatory democracy better than television does).’’ that is, innovation is less costly to adopt when it is ‘‘less upsetting’’, that is, more consistent withcurrent beliefs, and compatible with the status quo (p. 150). in organizationsand societies with compatible value systems, innovation champions areaccepted as leaders and play important roles in the dissemination of newideas and information that support process innovations. sandberg (2007) noted that enthusiastic champions serve as catalysts in organizations for the developmental stage of radical innovations (idea generation) and subsequent diffusion throughout the organization. ‘‘at the development stage, the enthusiasm spread from the champions and the coreteam to other parts of the organization, and in some cases also to otherdevelopment partners’’ (p. 269). she associated radical innovations withorganizational learning and process innovations 102technologically new and commercially successful products and services that offer substantial beneﬁts to customers. the role of networking serves as adriving force in the diffusion of the innovation and its successful marketingto customers through ‘‘personal visits, customer education, simulations and trials’’ (p. 271). while radical innovations resulted in the development of new products and services (for example, the epost letter and the nordicwalkers cases that were commercially successful), their diffusion tocustomers and their diffusion outside of the organization was a gradualprocess designed to sustain enthusiasm for the long term. there are several studies in management accounting that attribute the successful dissemination of accounting innovations to the diffusionliterature in sociology. two studies that are of particular interest are banker et al. (1996) and malmi (1999) . these studies have described accounting innovations as following a trial-and-error strategy whereby innovations are ﬁrst tried in one unit or a sub-unit and, if successful, arelater implemented in other units within the organization. the banker et al. (1996) study of a performance-based compensation plan illustrates this point. because the performance-based system proved to be successfulinitially, it was gradually implemented in additional locations. when anaccounting innovation is tried on an experimental basis in a unit/division and results in positive outcomes, the innovation can be more easily disseminated to other divisions within the organization. similarly, malmi (1999) discussed the role of corporate management in the ‘‘forced selection perspective’’ that led to early adoption of abc amongfinnish ﬁrms. the study corroborates the ﬁndings of banker et al. (1996) on the role of headquarters in implementing an organization-wide change. whilethe initial support (championing) for the adoption of the innovation wasdictated by top management, its diffusion from one unit to another was attributed to the innovation’s record of successful outcomes in those units that had already adopted it rather than its being imposed by topmanagement. thus, malmi (1999) supports the model depicted in fig. 6.1 where a successful adoption process requires that management (opinionleaders) championing the innovation dictate or mobilize sufﬁcient supportfrom other members of the organization for the innovation’s implementationand diffusion. fig. 6.1 also incorporates the results of sandberg’s (2007) study, which reported that top managements’ (champions’) deliberate support andinvolvement in large organizations (as is the case with chrysler and safety-kleen corporations discussed earlier) become necessary to adopt anddisseminate the innovations throughout the organizations. in this view oforganizational learning and process innovations 103learning, the adoption processes included the acquisition of knowledge (schulz, 2001 ) and the diffusion stage encompassed the dissemination of that knowledge to targeted markets and differentiated customers ( sandberg, 2007). thus, the diffusion-communication processes become central in the dissemination of new practices and modes of behavior to all organizationalmembers. however, there may also be political powers and cultural changeconstraints that impact the adoption and dissemination of innovations. fig. 6.1 lists several reasons for both the successes and the failures associated with diffusion of innovations. for example, one possible cause ofa failed innovation is that the process used to facilitate the adoption of theinnovation was ﬂawed. as brunsson (1982) noted, there is a difference between the economic decision (selecting the best course of action) and the political process (coalition formation) involved in implementing a course of action. the former typically relies on formal cost-beneﬁt analyses. the latteris more political and involves persuasion and coalition formation ( cyert & march, 1963 ;pfeffer, 1992 ). it may not be strategically possible to imple- ment the ‘‘best’’ course of action or outcome, nor politically feasible tosecure support for the adoption and diffusion of the innovation. we apply an evolutionary perspective to describe the two stages: adoption and diffusion processes of management accounting innovations. fig. 6.1 outlines the process and provides the general framework for the evolution ofmanagement accounting innovations. it describes the process from thedemand (adoption/implementation) for innovation to the diffusion (dis-semination) processes. the need for an accounting innovation begins whenexternal environmental and internal constraints give rise to the perception ofthe need for organizational learning. it is the cumulative effect of both theconstraints and the perceptions of a need for change that affects whether ornot a speciﬁc organization at a particular time adopts an innovation to meet a particular perceived need. 6.3. organizational learning and the birth and bureaucratization of accounting rules organizational e-growth, development, and transformation require account- ing innovations and learning. as organizations evolve over time, they createorganizational learning and process innovations 104accounting mechanisms that among other purposes serve to maintain organizational stability and the status quo. organizations develop newaccounting rules onlywhen they are necessary to address ‘‘new problems that do not seem to be covered by existing rules and when these problems are fairly recurrent, consequential or salient’’ ( schultz, 1998, p. 845 ). this enables the organization to retain what has been learned from past experiences in the form of ‘‘codiﬁed’’ rules and regulations. thus, bureaucratization takes place(schultz, 1998 ). however, this bureaucratization is not without its costs. established rules may inhibit subsequent learning and, as the result, diminish thelikelihood of subsequent innovations by the organization. in the case ofaccounting, this would mean that learning and innovation lead to the birth and codiﬁcation of new accounting rules. as organizations over time develop more rules, the potential for greater bureaucratization isincreased, which, in turn, may result in inhibiting future learningexperiences. speciﬁcally, schulz (1998) stated: ‘‘as lessons from past experiences get encoded in rules or other systems of automated (organizational) responses,new experiences become scarce. as a result, learning through furthercodiﬁcation of experiences declines. making rules and routines helps organizations respond to problems in a programmed and efﬁcient way, but, at the same time, rules create a dangerous sense of familiarity withproblems that reduces the likelihood that new problems will be seen asopportunities to draw new lessons’’ (p. 872). lawrenson (1992) described the bureaucratization of the organization’s decision making in british rail. before margaret thatcher’s becomingprime minister, british rail was engineering-driven. its incremental learninghad created values and mechanisms that reinforced the importance of maintaining superior engineering. decisions were made with the intent of maintaining an organization that reﬂected the highest engineering stan-dards. british rail responded to changes in the competitive environmentby searching for engineering innovations. financial measures played asecondary role in their decisions. as the environment changed and economicissues became more important under thatcher’s plan to privatize it, theorganization remained insensitive to the changing political environment. itrequired an explicit intervention by the government to override the existing bureaucratic rules and alter the organization’s orientation to learning and innovation ( dent, 1991 ).organizational learning and process innovations 1056.4. the adoption–diffusion processes of organizational learning in the management accounting literature organizations need for growth, political power, increased competitive posture and desire to adapt to environmental changes create the need for learning and innovation. organizational learning becomes critical in promoting strategic planning and control systems to enact cost accountingchanges ( kaplan & norton, 2001 ) in organizations. the rise of new rivals, that is, external constraints, leading to the perception by management of theneed for a change in cost management system is illustrated by the rise ofcompetition from japan in various industries, including that of automobiles.this competition created a sense of urgency and a need to adapt on the partof u.s. ﬁrms. the result was the adoption of various new (for the u.s. ﬁrms) management activities/processes such as jit, five sigma quality control, and, in accounting, an increased interest in cost measurement, forexample, abc ( anderson, 1995 ) in many organizations. however, in other organizations the actual adoption of proposed changes such as abc wasresisted and in some instances rejected due to extant organizationalstructures and bureaucracy (sisaye, 2003). ansari and euske (1987) reported a contrary example where an organ- ization’s extant bureaucratic structure was able effectively to resist an external force attempting to alter the nature of the unit’s costing system. they observed resistance to change when ‘‘top management’’ in d.c.imposed a new costing method for the geographically decentralized repairdepots. management of the depots was satisﬁed with the old system and,therefore, was resistant to adopting the new method. given the geographicalseparation between top management in d.c. and the repair depots and thelack of close supervision by top management of the repair depots, thechange in the repair depots ‘‘external environment’’, that is, top manage- ments attempt to impose a new costing system, was frustrated by the depots existing bureaucracy. they continued to use the old costing method formanaging their activities and adapted the data to the new system only forreporting to headquarters. barnett and hansen (1996) noted that an organization’s history and the lessons learned from past failures and/or successes both serve as internalconstraints to the adoption and diffusion of an innovation/change withinthe organization. these constraints are reﬂected in both the organization’s formal and informal structures related to strategy, policies, employees, andorganizational learning and process innovations 106organizational culture, all of which include norms, shared values, and behaviors (hannan & freeman, 1989). for example, anderson and young (1999) reported that context and organizational factors affected the nature of the abc system developed within a ﬁrm. they found that the complexity of the abc system proposed increased with the size of the group involved in the development of the new cost system. this suggests that the system theyadopted represented a compromise among the participants. the anderson and young (1999) study reveals that initially organizations may be rigid and resistant to change because they have stable routines and cultural practicesthat satisfy current performance levels and, therefore, the managers perceiveno need to change and saw different costs associated with the proposedchanges. as the result, the new system represented, as brunsson (1982) pro- posed, a series of adaptations to the various extant routines of the sub-units. over time, what are initially considered new accounting innovations tend, as described by anderson and young (1999) and ansari and euske (1987) , to be resisted by organizational members. however, if they ultimately areaccepted, they become the part of and are institutionalized as autonomousoperating procedures used to administer stable and routine functions. suchbureaucratization of the innovation in management accounting leads toprogrammed rules and routines, that later tend to be mechanistic and associated with efﬁciency of work procedures ( burns & stalker, 1961 ). in essence, technical innovations lead to the establishment of stable rules/ mechanisms, or what schultz (1998) described as new birth and codiﬁcation of accounting rules, that can contribute to resistance to new processinnovations. when technical accounting procedures are bureaucratized, management planning and control systems become more formal and institutionalized. inthese operating systems, mechanistic innovations prevail in day-to-day activities. accounting tasks become centralized to handle those operations and production activities that are routine, repetitive, and programmable(dirsmith & mcallister, 1982 ). formal rules not only specify procedures, they also deﬁne employee roles. accounting numbers, in effect, controlemployee behavior as well as the operating activities of the organization.formal accounting control systems monitor employee performance and theexistence of quantitative reports leads to their replacing the use ofpersonalized and qualitative feedback and interpersonal relationships in control systems. the predominance of a formal intra-unit orientation, that is, controll- ability, in the organization’s performance evaluation and reward systems has another important effect. it reduces the interactions among units andorganizational learning and process innovations 107discourages/inhibits the diffusion of a potential innovation within the organization. each unit operates as a distinct and separate unit within theorganization’s hierarchy. the members minimize its relationship with orconnection to any other unit. this inhibits the ﬂow of innovations across units and favors standalone innovations ( schulz, 1998 ). the awareness of the need for inter-unit cooperation may increase when organizational problems have ‘‘thematic relatedness’’, that is, possess a high degree ofsimilarity, or reﬂect a joint dependence on the same resources as often is thecase with accounting problems or procurement problems ( schultz, 1998 ). although these changes might lead to acceptance by some and resistance byother members, the uncertainties surrounding these changes might requiremembers to accept them or else leave the organization. under these circumstances, the central management of the organization can develop relatively generic common rule (s) that can be utilized by many or all of theorganization’s sub-units. the scale of the innovation/intervention also is relevant. when an innovation requires large-scale abolition of old rules to eliminate obsoletesystems and helps to alter the system, the recommendation is that theorganization undertakes a large-scale intervention program speciﬁcallyintended not only to abolish old rules but also to replace them with new ones. it can be inferred that schulz’s (1998) radical measures of rules changing are consistent with the ot approach described in chapter 5. organizational learning of the sort contemplated in management accounting, for example, abc or bsc, requires a signiﬁcant change in the organization’s rules and procedures. this involves an od (autonomous) orot (systemic) radical change strategy. this type of change is accompaniedby organizational response to the natural selection process of new forms(innovations) and results in transformational second-order change (double- loop) learning. both abc and bsc require a signiﬁcant change in the manner a process is viewed, that is, ‘‘thinking outside the box’’. abc requiresaccountants and managers to view a new and more complex set of cost driversthat includes drivers that have not been utilized in previous costing systems.bsc is an example of double-loop learning in management accounting thatstresses product development and new markets which focus on delivery ofgoods and services that meet customers’ needs. it emphasizes the user’s needto think beyond the traditional management accounting model of short-term proﬁtability (‘‘outside the box’’) and to integrate new dimensions. the introduction of non-ﬁnancial measures of marketing, production, and humanresources management requires reorientation, that is, double-loop learning,by those involved in managing the organization.organizational learning and process innovations 108an example of an accounting study that illustrates the double-loop learning approach of adoption–diffusion of innovation from a unit/division to organization-wide is that of davis and albright (2004) . they reported the results of a quasi-experimental ﬁeld study within a single banking organ- ization and suggested that those units that had adopted bsc showed superior performance when compared to those who did not. however,speckbacher et al. (2003) reported data indicating the difﬁculty in the implementation of bsc. the responses of the ﬁrms in their survey showedthat the evolutionary process required when organizations move from thetraditional ﬁnancial model to a new approach utilizing both ﬁnancial andnon-ﬁnancial inputs necessitated a longer time horizon for planning andimplementation. these studies suggest that, although organization innovation refers to the adoption of new behaviors, ideas, or systems; process innovations thatinvolve administrative processes or services that affect employees’ behaviorsand organizational structures are more complex. they are context-dependent where decentralized structures that have complex job structureswith ﬂexibility in the diffusion of innovations. in general, centralizedstructures facilitate the adoption process. in the context of managementaccounting systems, the success of adoption–diffusion of innovations depends on the choice of management accounting intervention strategies/ typologies: od or ot. in general, od innovations involve both technicaland administrative innovations in accounting. when od focuses ontechnical improvements, accounting innovations address incrementalchanges that are targeted at formalization, specialization, and efﬁciency inoperations, for example, work structures, processes or procedures, andchanges in individual and group behaviors. damanpour (1987) ,damanpour and evan (1984) , and west and farr (1989) refer to these changes as having micro-orientation, focusing on division and/or departmental structuralchanges. on the other hand, when od process innovation is accompanied by transformational changes, accounting changes entail an administrativereform that corresponds to ot intervention strategies. the change isbroader and addresses reorientation learning focused on new methods, forexample, search for new market opportunities and product innovations, orseek alternative responses to environmental changes. fox-wolfgramm, boal, and hunt (1998) associated these changes with organizational adaptation commonly pursued by prospector organizations. davis and albright (2004) andspeckbacher et al. (2003) argued that bsc is successful in companies that are willing to invest in a longer time horizon to implementorganizational learning and process innovations 109and realize the beneﬁts of bsc. these characteristics are commonly associated with prospector organizations and support the argument thatod’s administrative innovations promote integrative and systemic changeswhen the time horizon is longer to support ot organization-wide interventions. van de ven (1986) noted several factors that facilitate and inhibit the development of innovations associated with technical and transformational changes. he suggested that ‘‘these factors include[d] ideas, people,transactions, and context over time’’ (p. 591). molinsky (1999) argued that employees’ mores, customs and cultures can impede the management oforganizational change innovations (silva, leitao, & raposo, 2007). perera, mckinnon, and harrison (2003) highlighted the importance of the imple- mentation stage of the innovation adoption when organizational values,norms, social systems, and past experiences of adopters affect choice ofaccounting innovations and their subsequent adoption decisions. accordingly, differences in institutional and organizational behaviors and cultural processes among institutions of various sizes at either divisional orﬁeld levels contribute to variations in the adoption and diffusion of processinnovations, for example, new practices, as discussed by loundsbury (2001) in university recycling programs. it is widely accepted that, in larger organizations, greater structural complexity and interdependence require an emphasis on incremental as opposed to transformational changes. while organizations may prefer incremental approaches because of their desires for short-term, less disruptive improvements, they are more likely topursue radical transformations of strategic change following a trial-and-error period of unsuccessful incremental changes. they undertake theseradical reorientations primarily for two major reasons: ﬁrst, because ofsustained low performance, that is, internal cause; or, second, because of the urgent need to address major technological, social, and environmental changes, that is, external cause ( barley, 1986 ; tushman & romanelli, 1985). although innovation involves learning, the nature of the learning process does not completely describe the manner in which an innovation affects theorganization. accordingly, we have applied the two interrelated organiza-tional sociological dimensions of innovations processes, namely, (1) theadoption and diffusion theories of rogers (1971, 1995), to approach organizational learning, and (2) process innovations in management accounting systems: mechanistic, organic, od and ot innovation typologies.organizational learning and process innovations 110chapter 7 conclusion and implications for future research this chapter integrates the resource-based approach to organizational change and od based on the organizational learning literature. in the previouschapters, we argued that the level of the organization’s resources can serve to support or constrain learning and innovations in organizations. resources serve as enablers for innovations and organizational ability and willingness toaccept the beneﬁts and/or risks associated with innovation. depending onresource endowments, the organization likely will be more or less willingto undertake a particular organizational change. in addition we indicate thatthe perceived need for innovation is driven by the ability of the organizationto identify a signiﬁcant change in its environment. the problem created by thechange may be internal or external to the organization. finally, we point out the important role innovation champions play in moving the innovation from a proposed solution to an identiﬁed problem to an activity implemented by allor a part of the organization. 7.1. resource-based approach to organizational learning and performance the resource-based view of an organization suggests that differences inresources among organizations affect the propensities for organizations toundertake strategic planning initiatives in response to environmental changes. organizational resources may be used less effectively when organizations engage in ‘‘exploitation’’ of knowledge that they already have acquired orwhen they try to use their resources to improve the products and/or servicesthey already produce or provide rather than to undertake new or radically 111altered activities. kraatz and zajac (2001) suggest that organizations rela- tively well endowed with resources are less likely to engage in major strategic changes to adapt to environmental changes. this, may be because theabundance of (slack) organizational resources may permit them to survive environmental changes without undertaking any strategic changes. these organizations need to respond/innovate only when the environmentalchange is perceived to create a signiﬁcant threat to the organization’s survivaland/or growth. kraatz and zajac (2001) noted that organizations having the most success in the past are the least likely to change their goals because oftheir commitment to the current strategies that maximize the utilization ofexisting resources, even in situations that involve environmental uncertainty(p. 636). most of the time, resources-rich large organizations are more likely to survive external threats from environmental change. nevertheless, this does not rule out the fact that successful strategic changes are initiated/undertaken by resources-endowed ﬁrms. when resource-endowed ﬁrms doundertake a strategic innovation, their superior resources can facilitatethe innovation and increase the likelihood of its success. thus when theresource endowed organizations do undertake the changes, they are likely tobe adaptive to change and to beneﬁt from strategic changes. the resource-based view of an organization emphasizes the importance of heterogeneity in a ﬁrm’s resources: physical, natural, economic, andﬁnancial. it suggests that those ﬁrms with heterogeneous resources whopossess resources that are non-substitutable, difﬁcult to imitate, and are rareand valuable, have a relative advantage over their competitors. when ﬁrmshave both the resources and the complementary assets that provide access toboth manufacturing and distribution facilities to implement best manage-ment practices associated with cost and quality of products and services,they have acquired competitive advantage strategies relative to their competitors. these advantages are related to externalities (liability costs, legal fees, clean-up costs) that support improved organizational perfor-mance (barney, 1988; christmann, 2000 ;rumelt, 1974 ). kraatz and zajac (2001) revealed that, when organizations possess ‘‘valuable and distinctive resources’’, they are ‘‘more reluctant to changestrategies in response to environmental changes’’ (p. 648). however, thesechanges can weaken the positive relationships between strategic change andperformance (p. 648). organizations can take advantage of learning as a competitive advantage to secure control of valuable and scarce resources. those organizations that can accumulate such diverse or heterogeneousresources through acquisition, imitation, or substitution are able to improvetheir competitive advantage in the long term to sustain performance.organizational learning and process innovations 112management accounting systems can enhance organizational resources when they are used to develop learning and knowledge systems related toproduct costs, customer preferences, market sectors, competitive ﬁrms, andother economic factors that inﬂuence performance. accounting as an enabler of organizational resources can be integrated into the organization’s activities to improve learning, knowledge, and performance. when account-ing systems are based on and utilized to take advantage of the organization’sexperience, they can advance the efﬁciency and cost-saving mechanismsof technological operations. therefore, accounting systems are criticalresources that can help differentiate organizations from their competitors. in general, the resource-based view of the organization stresses capabi- lities arising from the heterogeneity of resources. it is argued that those organizations that obtain valuable resources that cannot be easily imitated have a competitive advantage over others. to this end, organizationallearning can support performance related to resources acquisition, utiliza-tion, and capabilities to employ resources for competitive advantage(uhlenbruck, meyer, & hitt, 2003, p. 262 ).bapuji and crossan (2004) have also suggested that organizations with endowment of resources, forexample, complex organizations with ample resources, can take risks bymanaging the costs of innovation and learning (p. 408). however, environmental dynamism, uncertainty, and market volatility increase competition and short-term life cycles of products, which, in turn,increases the demand for innovations. thus, when external environmentalfactors generate uncertainty in organizational strategies, structures, andsystems, organizational change is desirable. this change requires certainpreconditions for intervention and innovation. one of these conditions is theorganization’s strategy. for example, ozomer et al. (1997) described prospectors or market leaders as having an ‘‘aggressive strategic posture’’ that enables them to take risks to meet the demands of the external environment. they already have a propensity for initiating and pursuinginnovative strategies. environmental dynamism and uncertainty shape orcreate the need to adopt prospectors’ organization strategies and structuresaccordingly. they observed that the ‘‘strategic posture of the ﬁrm is found tobe the most important determinant of innovativeness’’ (p. 410). they notedthe effect of strategic posture for prospectors who are active interventionists isthe initiation and implementation of appropriate strategies that support innovations. overall, prospectors perceived environmental uncertainty as opportunities for interventions to change/innovate ( ozomer et al., 1997, p. 441 ).conclusion and implications for future research 113the adoption–diffusion literature suggests that external factors and structural mechanisms facilitate diffusion between the source (originator) and the adopter. strange and soule (1998) identiﬁed both external and internal sources as diffusion-contagious. among the external sources that are commonly identiﬁed in agricultural ( leagans & loomis, 1971 )a n d pharmaceutical research ( coleman et al., 1966 ) are ‘‘mass media outlets like the newspaper, tv and radio, and change agents such as the farm bureau’s extension agent and the pharmaceutical company’s detail man’’ ( strange & soule, 1998, p. 271 ). they have also identiﬁed internal inﬂuences as arising from ‘‘internal diffusion processes [which] operate via information andinﬂuence ﬂowing within the adopting population’’ (p. 272). ‘‘interactionnetworks’’ become the main facilitators of diffusion. interaction, when face- to-face, facilitates the exchange of information creating close ties, cohesion, and inﬂuence within the network. actors and agents play as facilitators.moreover, actors’ prestige and inﬂuence coupled with geographical orspatial proximity aid the diffusion process. when several actors are involved in the diffusion process, wejnert (2002) argued that competition among actors’ intensiﬁes and their ability tofacilitate adoption and to inﬂuence decisions depends on the centrality oftheir location in the network. she suggested that diffusion research must also focus on the actor’s role in and contribution to the diffusion process. most importantly, it is the actor’s perception of ‘‘the value of an innovationand the actual feasibility of adoption’’ that impacts the diffusion process(p. 319). she associated differences between early (innovators) and later(lagers) adopters with differences in actors’ social and economic character-istics. she proposed that ‘‘an actor’s threshold of innovation accounts fordifference of time in adoption’’ (p. 319). rogers (1995) had noted these differences between early and late adopters as being associated with actors’ social and economic characteristics and positions within the network. 7.2. conclusion: implications for future research in conclusion, we suggest that management accounting researchers payparticular attention to an organization’s approach to adoption and diffusion of innovation strategies, particularly when they are designing andimplementing process innovation programs for an organization. the extent(technical and administrative), and the scope (autonomous and systemic)organizational learning and process innovations 114dimensions of the innovation processes shape the adoption and diffusion strategies appropriate for the design and implementation of the fourtypologies or dimensions of management accounting innovations incomplex organizations. the innovation process continua can be reﬂected in a 2 /c22 contingency framework we outlined in table 1. it yields four types of innovation changestrategies: mechanistic, organic, od, and ot. in prescribing or describingan innovation, it is, therefore, imperative for managers and accountingresearchers to examine the nature of the innovation and the organizationalsetting. they must take into consideration the relationships amongmechanistic, organic od, and ot by means of the single-loop (incremental)and double-loop (discontinuous) organizational learning strategies. it is important to understand the sequence within which a successful innovation takes place. schulz (2001) described the sequence of the learning- innovation process in organizations as consisting of two inter-related stages:adoption and diffusion. he related the ﬁrst stage to the acquisition/production (adoption) of knowledge that results in gathering information,codiﬁcation, and exploration. this is followed by the second stage that is thedistribution or dissemination (diffusion) processes. in an organization theadoption stage is when the organization acquires the knowledge related to the potential innovation. diffusion, the second stage, involves the dissem- ination and transfer of that knowledge from a unit/division to the entireorganization. when the two stages – adoption and diffusion – are applied to manage- ment accounting innovations, they are related to the two questions com-monly associated with the success and/or failures of any innovation. stage 1reveals why certain management accounting innovations are more likely tobe implemented (adopted) than others. stage 2 details why the dissemina- tion (diffusion) of some accounting innovations is more successful than others. these two stages of organizational learning-innovation imply thatknowledge production (adoption) and distribution (dissemination) pro-cesses follow an evolutionary process. critical to the understanding of the innovation process in management accounting systems in the context of the od and ot types of innovations isthe learning process. autonomous-division focused (double loop) learningis associated with od, and systemic-transformational (double loop) learning is associated with ot intervention strategies. accordingly, the organiza- tional context for either od or ot change strategy is largely inﬂuenced bythe scope of the innovation. while both od and ot focus on the technicaland administrative extent dimensions, their differences are associated withconclusion and implications for future research 115the scope, deﬁned as the magnitude of change: od is limited, what we labeled ‘‘autonomous’’, whereas ot is much more broadly applied withinthe organization. we labeled this as ‘‘systemic.’’ in other words, the scope ofthe change, autonomous or systemic, affects the mode of organizational learning required by the innovation: single or double loop. while single loop is associated with mechanistic or organic innovations, double loop isprevalent in od and ot. however, the double loop can have either anautonomous or a systemic scope when it is associated with od or ot. when the scope is autonomous, the innovation’s impact is limited to individual departments or divisions. it can be accomplished through od’s(autonomous double-loop learning) intervention strategies of behavioral orcultural changes that affect employees’ behavior through education, training, compensation, and performance evaluation systems, or tqm’s strategy of incremental change. on the contrary, when scope is systemic, ithas organization-wide implications. the changes become consonant withot (systemic double-loop learning) innovation strategy. ot has beenassociated with bpr that requires radical approaches which necessitateorganizational restructuring and job realignment, as well as displacementof employees whose skills might not be consistent with the new jobs orstructures. we conclude that, depending on the scope and extent of process innovations, the four types of process innovation strategies – mechanistic,organic, od, and ot – can be used by a wide range of organizations forsuccessful initiation and implementation (adoption) of accounting innova-tions. if an innovation will have long-term administrative impact either onthe departmental/unit level or at the organizational accounting andreporting functions and most do, we suggest that od and ot strategiesprovide the preferred adoption and diffusion strategies to bring about those desired changes. we applied an evolutionary perspective to describe the adoption– diffusion processes of management accounting innovations. fig. 6.1 outlined the constructs used to trace the process from the demand(adoption) to the diffusion (dissemination) of process innovations. weargue that one of the most critical factors that impacts the understanding ofthe innovation process and determines the intervention strategies in thecontext of od and ot innovations is the learning process: od as gradual (autonomous) and ot as radical (systemic) double-loop learning. accord- ingly, the organizational context for either od or ot is largely inﬂuencedby organizational structural (divisions or units) arrangements for od ororganizational wide for ot.organizational learning and process innovations 116when the organization structure is decentralized, the innovation’s impact can be primarily limited to individual departments or divisions. od then becomes the appropriate intervention strategy when accompanied by theneed for behavioral or cultural changes that resemble the tqm approach to incremental change. however, when the structure is centralized, an innovation more likely has organization-wide implications. the changesbecome consonant with ot-bpr which accompanies radical approachesnecessitating longer-term organizational restructuring and job realignmentprograms. od and ot strategies thus provide the appropriate adoption anddiffusion strategies to accounting innovations depending on the scope ofthose changes: od is division oriented while ot has systemic wide changesin organizational accounting and reporting functions. we ﬁnd that the most important contribution of the adoption–diffusion process innovation framework is in its ability to facilitate the analysis of twocritical research questions associated with management accounting innova-tions. the ﬁrst question is related to why some innovations are readilyaccepted, while others, apparently similar and apparently equally desirableproposed innovations, are not? the second question deals with why someparticular innovations succeed in some ﬁrms when the same innovation failsin others? we have also extended argyris and schon’s (1978) andschultz’s (1998) theory of organizational learning to examine these two interrelated researchquestions of why some innovations succeed and others fail within thecontext of adoption and diffusion of abc and bsc of managementaccounting innovations as illustrated in fig. 6.1. we suggest that researcherswho attempt to assess the strategic contingency (sf and cf) questions of ifand why accounting innovations succeed/fail, should consider the issue of‘‘organizational ﬁt’’ as well as the usual economic (cost–beneﬁt) factors typically considered ( ittner et al., 2002 ). is the proposed innovation consistent with knowledge, norms and structure of the organization? if it is not, the organization must create an environment within the organizationappropriate for its successful implementation. an example of the ﬁrst question is: why was abc apparently more readily adopted than the bsc? both had the goal of improving manage-ment’s effectiveness. one could hypothesize that abc was more amenableto gradual (mechanistic or organic) introduction into the organization’s systems focusing on technical changes. managers were used to costing systems. as such, abc represented a more elaborate system. the changewas incremental. the type of learning initially required is single-loopfocusing on technical change and yields less disruption and resistance fromconclusion and implications for future research 117members of the organization insuring that the decision will be made on an economic basis. when the innovation is implemented, it initially can be introduced as an incremental change, one that can be limited in both its scope and its breadth of administrative changes (od single loop). this means that situations which are most likely to beneﬁt from its initiation can serve as the prototypefor its adoption by the ﬁrm. this minimizes the risk to the organization aswell as the costs involved. it also enhances the cost-beneﬁt of the experi-ment, that is, adopting it on a limited administrative change or reform basis,have an od-autonomous scope. by contrast, in bsc as an organizational change strategy, od-systemic is likely to be broad in its scope and breadth. the bsc requires that a single proﬁt-related indicator be augmented with new and unfamiliar indicators reﬂecting other facets of the organization’s activities. the new indicatorsdiffer from the traditional ﬁnancial measure(s), for example, proﬁt, sales;indicates considered to be subjective non-ﬁnancial measures, for example,customer satisfaction are considered to be as relevant as objective and morefamiliar measures, for example, accounting-related numbers. this means that old thinking patterns must be replaced by radical, new approaches. changes like bsc could be expected to require a more carefully planned and a more costly implementation relative to innovations like abc. while the potential gains may be signiﬁcant, they are harder to demonstrateex ante. by contrast, the potential disruption of the organization’s processes,for example, resistance to the change, is readily apparent to managers exante. thus while both abc and bsc have the goal of improving management’s effectiveness and improving the organizations long-term proﬁtability, abchas been more widely accepted than bsc. this likely is the case because abc is more amenable to single and/or autonomous double-loop learning that requires gradual introduction into the organization’s systems as anincremental change. these changes can be instituted following od strategyof limited breadth conﬁned to a single division. when they are found tobe successful at the division/business unit levels as ness and cucuzza’s (1995) described for chrysler, they are adopted and implemented at the organization-wide levels. on the contrary, the introduction of bsc is expected to require systemic double-loop learning and an ot intervention strategy. this necessitates thedevelopment of a comprehensive strategic plan for the innovation with alonger-term time horizon that is more costly to implement by comparisonwith that of abc. when accounting innovations call for bsc that requireorganizational learning and process innovations 118ot intervention strategies, the potential disruptions of the organization’s processes, for example, resistance to the changes, are expected to besigniﬁcant. when systemic double-loop organizational learning strategiesresult in reorientation and paradigmatic learning changes, accounting innovations become instrumental in instituting transformational changes to replace existing accounting reporting and control systems. the framework can also be applied to issues in ﬁnancial accounting and reporting. responses to external reporting issues are typically a ﬁnancialaccounting problem, for example, the reporting of the cost of stock optionsin the income statement requiring an innovation. these changes often areadvocated or initiated by forces external to the organization. thesesituations also exist in management accounting. for example, the od-ot framework can be applied to issues in management accounting reporting changes advocated or initiated by forces external to the organization. thecurrent movement toward measurement of environmental and ecologicalresources management concerns reﬂects is an example of such issues. the adoption–diffusion framework can thus assist in the understanding of how innovation will be received by the organization. it suggests that thegreater the degree of the scope (autonomous or systemic) to which areporting innovation will impact the activities of the organization, the greater the learning (double loop) effort required in implementing it. the framework can assist in the understanding how the innovation will bereceived by the organization.conclusion and implications for future research 119references ambrose, m. l., & schminke, m. (2003). organization structure as a moderator of the relationship between procedural justice, interactional justice, perceived organizational support, and supervisory trust. journal of applied psychology ,88(2), 295–305. anderson, s. w. (1995). a framework for assessing cost management system changes. the case of activity based costing implementation at general motors, 1986–1993. journal of management accounting research ,7(fall), 1–51. anderson, s. w., & young, s. m. (1999). the impact of contextual and process factors on the evaluation of activity based costing systems. accounting, organizations and society , 24(7), 525–559. ansari, s. l., & euske, k. j. (1987). rational, rationalizing, and reifying use of accounting data in organizations. accounting, organizations and society ,12(6), 549–570. antonacopoulou, e., ferdinand, f., grace, m., & easterby-smith, m. (2005, january 14). dynamic capabilities and organizational learning: socio-political tensions in organizationalrenewal . aim research working paper series, e.s.r.c. – economic & social research council. argyris, c. (1992). on organizational learning . cambridge, ma: blackwell. argyris, c., & kaplan, r. s. (1994). commentary-implementing new knowledge: the case of activity-based costing. accounting horizons ,8(3), 83–105. argyris, c., & schon, d. a. (1978). organizational learning: a theory of action perspective . reading, ma: addison-wesley. argyris, c., & schon, d. a. (1996). organizational learning ii: theory, method and practice . reading, ma: addison-wesley. arthur, j. b., & huntley, c. l. (2005). ramping up the organizational learning curve: assessing the impact of deliberate learning on organizational performance under gain sharing.academy of management journal ,48(6), 1159–1170. attewell, p. (1992). technology diffusion and organizational learning: the case of business computing. organization science ,3(1), 1–19. bacharach, s. b., bamberger, p., & sonnenstuhl, w. j. (1996). the organizational transformation process: the micro-politics of dissonance reduction and the alignmentof logic’s of action. administrative science quarterly ,41(3), 477–506. banker, r. d., lee, s. y., & potter, g. (1996). a ﬁeld study of the impact of a performance- based incentive plan. journal of accounting and economics, 21(2), 195–226. banker, r. d., lee, s. y., potter, g., & srinivasan, d. (2000). an empirical investigation of an incentive plan that includes non-ﬁnancial measures. accounting review ,75(1), 93–114. baptista, r. (1999). the diffusion of process innovation: a selective review. international journal of the economics of business ,6(1), 107–129. bapuji, h., & crossan, m. (2004). from questions to answers: reviewing organizational learning research. management learning ,35(4), 397–417. 121barley, s. r. (1986). technology as an occasion for structuring: evidence from observations of ct scanners and the social order of radiology departments. administrative science quarterly ,31(1), 78–108. barnett, w. p., & carroll, g. r. (1987). competition and mutualism among early telephone companies. administrative science quarterly ,32(3), 400–421. barnett, w. p., & carroll, g. r. (1995). modeling internal organizational change. annual review of sociology ,21, 217–236. barnett, w. p., & hansen, m. t. (1996). the red queen in organizational evolution. strategic management journal ,17(special issue-summer), 139–157. barney, j. b. (1988). returns to bidding ﬁrms in mergers and acquisitions: reconsidering the relatedness hypothesis. strategic management journal ,9(special issue), 71–78. barron, m. (2006). excellence in administrative innovation. journal of housing and community development ,63(1), 22–27. behery, m. h. (2008). leadership, knowledge sharing, and organizational beneﬁts. the journal of american academy of business ,12(2), 227–236. bessant, j. (2005). enabling continuous and discontinuous innovation: learning from the private sector. public money & management ,25(1), 35–49. birnberg, j. g. (1998). some reﬂections on the evolution of organizational control. behavioral research in accounting (suppl. 10), 27–46. blackman, d., connelly, j., & henderson, s. (2004). does double loop learning create reliable knowledge. the learning organization ,11(1), 11–27. boeker, w. (1989). the development and institutionalization of subunit power in organizations. administrative science quarterly ,34, 388–410. brass, d. j., & burkhadt, m. e. (1993). potential power and power use: an investigation of structure and behavior. academy of management journal ,36(3), 441–470. brown, j. s., & duguid, p. (2001). knowledge and organization: a social-practice perspective. organization science ,12(2), 198–213. brunsson, n. (1982). the irrationality of action and action rationality: decisions, ideologies and organizational actions. journal of management studies ,19(1), 29–44. bryant, s. e., & terborg, j. r. (2008). impact of peer mentor training on creating and sharing organizational knowledge. journal of managerial issues, 20(1), 1–29. brynjolfsson, e., renshaw, a. a., & alstyne, m. v. (1997). the matrix of change. sloan management review ,38(winter), 37–54. buller, p. f., & mcevoy, g. m. (1989). determinants of the institutionalization of planned organizational change. group and organization studies ,14(1), 33–50. burns, t., & stalker, g. m. (1961). the management of innovation . london: tavistock. burt, s. (1987). social contagion and innovation: cohesion versus structural equivalence. american journal of sociology ,92(6), 1287–1335. butler, j. e. (1988). theories of technological innovation as useful tools for corporate strategy. strategic management journal ,9(1), 15–29. chan, p., cooper, r., & tzortzopoulos, p. (2005). organizational learning: conceptual challenges from a project perspective. construction management and economics , 23(september), 747–756. chia, y. m., & koh, h. c. (2007). organizational culture and the adoption of management accounting practices in the public sector: a singapore study. financial accountability & management ,23(2), 189–213.organizational learning and process innovations 122christmann, p. (2000). effects of ‘best practices’ of environmental management on cost advantage: the role of complimentary assets. academy of management journal ,43, 663–680. coghlan, d. (2003). practitioner research for organizational knowledge: mechanistic – and organistic – oriented approaches to insider action research. management learning ,34(4), 451–463. coleman, j., katz, s. e., & menzel, h. (1966). medical innovation: a diffusion theory . indianapolis, in: bobbs-merrill. crossan, m. m., & berdrow, i. (2003). organizational learning and strategic renewal. strategic management journal ,24(11), 1087–1105. cyert, r. m., & march, j. g. (1963). a behavioral theory of the ﬁrm. englewood cliffs, nj: prentice-hall. daft, r. l. (1978). a dual-core model of organizational innovation. academy of management journal ,21(2), 193–210. damanpour, f. (1987). the adoption of technological, administrative, and ancillary innovations: impact of organizational factors. journal of management ,13(4), 675–688. damanpour, f., & evan, w. m. (1984). organizational innovation and performance: the problem of ‘organizational lag’. administrative science quarterly ,29(3), 392–409. davenport, t. h. (1993). process innovation: reengineering work through information technology . boston, ma: harvard business school press. davidson, w. h. (1993). beyond re-engineering: the three phases of business transformation. ibm systems journal ,32(1), 65–79. davis, s., & albright, t. (2004). an investigation of the effect of balanced scorecard implementation on ﬁnancial performance. management accounting research ,15(2), 135–153. dearing, j. w. (2009). applying diffusion of innovation theory to intervention development. research on social work practice ,19(5), 503–518. dent, j. (1991). accounting and organizational cultures. a ﬁeld study of the emergence of a new organizational reality. accounting, organizations and society ,16, 705–732. dibella, a. j. (2007). critical perceptions or organizational change. journal of change management ,7(3–4), 231–242. dirsmith, w. m., & mcallister, j. p. (1982). the organic vs. mechanistic audit. journal of accounting, auditing and finance ,5(3), 214–228. dixon, j. r., arnold, p., heineke, j. l., kinn, j. s., & mulligan, p. (1994). business process reengineering: improving in new strategic directions. california management review , 36(summer), 93–108. drake, a. r., haka, s. f., & ravenscroft, s. p. (1999). cost system and incentive structure effects on innovation, efﬁciency and proﬁtability in teams. the accounting review ,74(3), 323–345. drucker, p. e. (1995). redesigning the corporation requires a new set of tools and concepts: the information executives need. harvard business review ,73(1),54–63. dugger, w. m. (1988). an institutional analysis of corporate power. journal of economic issues , 22(1), 79–111. elenkov, d. s., judge, w., & wright, p. (2005). strategic leadership and executive innovation inﬂuence: an international multi-cluster comparative study. strategic management journal ,26, 665–682. elkjaer, b. (2004). organizational learning: the third way. management learning ,35(4), 419–434.references 123engestrom, y. (2007). from stabilization knowledge to possibility knowledge in organizational learning. management learning ,38(3), 271–275. engestrom, y., kerosuo, h., & kajamaa, a. (2007). beyond discontinuity: expansive organizational learning remembered. management learning ,38(3), 319–336. etzioni, a. (1961). a comparative analysis of complex organizations: in power, involvement, and their correlates . new york, ny: the free press. ezzamel, m., & willmott, h. (1998). accounting for teamwork: a critical study of group- based systems of organizational control. administrative science quarterly ,43(2), 358–396. ezzamel, m., willmott, h., & worthington, f. (2008). manufacturing shareholder value: the role of accounting in organizational transformation. accounting, organizations and society ,33(1), 107–140. fichman, r. g., & kemerer, c. f. (1997). the assimilation of software process innovations: an organizational learning perspective. management science ,43(10), 1345–1363. fox-wolfgramm, s. j., boal, k. b., & hunt, j. g. (1998). organizational adaptation to institutional change: a comparative study of ﬁrst-order change in prospector and defender banks. administrative science quarterly ,43(1), 87–126. frenzel, a., & grupp, h. (2009). using models of innovation diffusion to forecast market success: a practitioner’s guide. research/evaluation ,18(1), 39–50. galaskiewicz, j., et al. (1985). the inﬂuence of corporate power, social status, and market position on corporate interlocks in a regional network. social forces ,64(2), 403–431. galbraith, j. k. (1967). the new industrial state . boston, ma: houghton-mifﬂin. gatignon, h., & robertson, t. s. (1985). a propositional inventory for new diffusion research. the journal of consumer research ,11(4), 849–867. giddens, a. (1987). social theory and modern sociology . cambridge, ma: polity press. gloet, m., & terziovski, m. (2004). exploring the relationship between knowledge manage- ment practices and innovation performance. journal of manufacturing technology management ,15, 402–409. gort, m., & will, r. a. (1986). the evolution of technologies and investment in innovation. the economic journal ,96(september), 741–757. gosselin, m. (1997). the effect of strategy and organizational structure on the adoption and implementation of activity-based costing. accounting, organizations and society ,22(2), 105–122. grant, r. m. (1996). prospering in dynamically-competitive environments: organizational capability as knowledge integrated. organization science ,7(4), 375–387. grattet, r., jenness, v., & curry, t. r. (1998). the homogenization and differentiation of hate crime law in the united states, 1978 to 1995: innovation and diffusion in thecriminalization of bigotry. american sociological review ,63(2), 286–307. gulden, g. k., & reck, r. h. (1992). combining quality and reengineering efforts for process excellence. information strategy: the executive journal ,10(1), 10–17. hammer, m.  (1990). reengineering work: don’t automate, obliterate. harvard business review ,68(4), 104–112. hammer, m., & champy, j. (1993). reengineering the corporation: a manifesto for business revolution . new york, ny: harper business publications. hannan, m. t., & freeman, j. (1984). structural inertia and organizational change. american sociological review ,49(1), 149–164.organizational learning and process innovations 124hannan, m. t., & freeman, j. (1989). organizational ecology . cambridge, ma/boston, ma: harvard university press. hanvanich, s., sivakumar, k., & hult, g. t. m. (2006). the relationship of learning and memory with organizational performance: the moderating role of turbulence. academy of marketing science journal ,34(4), 600–612. haunschild, p. r., & rhee, m. (2004). the role of volition in organizational learning: the case of automotive product recalls. management science ,50(11), 1545–1560. hauser, k., & paper, d. (2007). simulation of business re-engineering processes: case study of a united states motor manufacturing company. international journal of management , 24(4), 676–687. hekkert, m. p., suurs, r. a. a., negro, s. o., kuhlmann, s., & smits, r. e. h. m. (2007). functions of innovation systems. a new approach for analyzing technological change. technological forecasting and social change ,74(4), 413–432. hennessy, l. (2005). recognizing administrative innovation. journal of housing and community development ,62(1), 22–26. herold, d. m., jayaraman, n., & narayanaswamy, c. r. (2006). what is the relationship between organizational slack and innovation? journal of managerial issues, 18(3), 372–392. herzog, n. v., polajnar, a., & tonchia, s. (2007). development of validation of business process reengineering (bpr) variables: a survey research in slovenian companies. international journal of production research ,45(24), 5811–5834. howell, j. m., & higgins, c. a. (1990). champions of technological innovation. administrative science quarterly ,35(2), 317–341. hull, f., & hage, j. (1982). organizing for innovation: beyond burn’s and stalker’s organic type. sociology ,16, 564–577. ittner, c. d., lanen, w., & larcker, d. f. (2002). the association between activity based costing and manufacturing performance. journal of accounting research ,40(3), 711–726. ittner, c. d., & larcker, d. f. (1998). innovations in performance measurement: trends and research implications. journal of management accounting research ,10, 205–238. jacobs, d. (1988). corporate economic power and the state: a longitudinal assessment of two explanations. american journal of sociology ,93(4), 852–881. jamali, d. (2005). changing management paradigms: implications for educational institutions. the journal of management development ,24(2), 104–115. jensen, r. (1983). innovation adoption and diffusion when there are competing innovations. journal of economic theory ,29(1), 161–171. jensen, r. (2001). strategic intra-ﬁrm innovation adoption and diffusion. southern economic journal ,68(1), 120–132. jerez-gomez, p., cespedes-lorente, j., & valle-cabrera, r. (2005). organizational learning capability: a proposal of measurement. journal of business research ,58(6), 715–725. johnson, h. t. (1992). relevance regained: from top-down control to bottom-up empowerment . new york, ny: the free press. johnson, h. t., & kaplan, r. s. (1987). relevance lost: the rise and fall of management accounting . boston, ma: harvard business school press. jones, n. b., herschel, r. t., & douglas, d. m. (2003). using ‘knowledge champions’ to facilitate knowledge management. journal of knowledge management ,7(1), 49–63. jones, t. c., & dugdale, d. (2002). the abc bandwagon and the juggernaut of modernity. accounting, organizations and society ,27(1), 121–163.references 125kabanoff, b. (1991). equity, equality, power, and conﬂict. academy of management review , 16(2), 416–441. kandemir, d., & hult, g. t. m. (2005). a conceptualization of an organizational learning culture in international joint ventures. industrial marketing management ,14(5), 43–439. kaplan, r. s. (1989). management accounting for advanced technological environments. science ,25(august), 819–823. kaplan, r. s., & norton, d. p. (2001). transforming the balanced score card from performance measurement to strategic management: parts i and ii. accounting horizons , 15(1), 87–104; 15(2), 147–160. katz, e. (1999). theorizing diffusion: tarde and sorokin revisited. annals of the american academy of social science ,556(november), 144–155. kober, r., ng, j., & paul, b. j. (2007). the interrelationships between management control mechanisms and strategy. management accounting research ,18(4), 425–452. krackhardt, d. (1990). assessing the political landscape: structure, cognition, and power in organizations. administrative science quarterly ,36, 342–369. kratz, m. s., & zajac, e. j. (2001). how organizational resources affect strategic change and performance in turbulent environments: theory and evidence. organization science , 12(5), 632–657. kuhn, t. s. (1970). the structure of scientiﬁc revolutions. chicago, il: university of chicago press. kumar, v., & krishnan, t. v. (2002). multinational diffusion models: an alternative approach. marketing science ,21(3), 318–330. lant, t. k., & mezias, s. j. (1992). an organizational learning model of convergence and reorientation. organization science ,3(1), 47–71. lapsley, i., & wright, e. (2004). the diffusion of management accounting innovations in the public sector: a research agenda. management accounting research ,15, 355–374. lawrence, t. b., maueus, m. k., kyck, b., & kleysen, r. f. (2005). the politics of organizational learning: integrating power into the 4i framework. academy of management review ,30(1), 180–191. lawrenson, d. m. (1992). britain’s railways: the predominance of engineering over accountancy during the inter-war period. critical perspectives on accounting ,3(1), 45–60. leagans, j. p., & loomis, c. p. (1971). behavioral changes in agriculture: concepts and strategies for inﬂuencing transition . ithaca, ny: cornell university press. lin, h.-f., & lee, g.-g. (2005). impact of organizational learning and knowledge management factors on e-business adoption. management decision ,43(2), 171–188. lopez, s. p., peon, j. m. m., & ordas, c. j. v. (2005). organizational learning as a determining factor in business performance. the learning organization ,12(3), 227–245. lounsbury, m. (2001). institutional sources of practice variation: stafﬁng college and university recycling programs. administrative science quarterly ,46(1),29–56. lumpkin, g. t., & lichtenstein, b. b. (2005). the role of organizational learning in the opportunity-recognition process. entrepreneurship, theory & practice ,29(4), 451–472. macpherson, a., & jones, o. (2008). object-mediated learning and strategic renewal in a mature organization. management learning ,39(2), 177–201. malmi, t. (1999). activity-based costing diffusion across organizations: an exploratory empirical analysis of finnish ﬁrms. accounting, organizations and society ,24(8), 649–672. march, j. g., & simon, h. a. (1958). organizations . new york, ny: wiley.organizational learning and process innovations 126mcadams, r. (2005). a multi-level theory of innovation implementation: normative evaluation, legitimization and conﬂict. european journal of innovation management ,8, 373–388. metzger, m. b., & phillips, m. j. (1991). corporate control, business ethics instruction and intra-organizational reality: a review essay. american business law journal ,29(1), 127–154. mezias, s. j., & glynn, m. a. (1993). the three faces of corporate renewal: institution, revolution, and evolution. strategic management journal ,14(2), 77–101. molinsky, a. l. (1999). sanding down the edge: paradoxical impediments to organizational change. the journal of applied behavioral science ,35(1), 8–24. morgan, g. (1986). images of organization . beverly hills, ca: sage publications. morrill, c. (1991). the customs of conﬂict management among corporate executives. american anthropologist ,93(4), 871–893. naranjo-gil, d., & hartmann, f. (2007). management accounting systems, top management team heterogeneity and strategic change. accounting, organizations and society ,32(7/8), 735–756. ness, j. a., & cucuzza, t. g. (1995). tapping the full potential of abc. harvard business review ,73(4), 130–138. ozsomer, a., calantone, r. j., & benedetto, a. d. (1997). what makes forms more innovative? a look at organizational and environmental factors. journal of business and industrial marketing ,12(6), 400–416. pearce, c. l., & ensley, m. d. (2004). a reciprocal and longitudinal investigation of the innovation process: the central role of shared vision in product and process innovation teams (ppits). journal of organizational behavior ,25, 259–278. perera, s., mckinnon, j. l., & harrison, g. l. (2003). diffusion of transfer pricing innovation in the context of commercialization: a longitudinal case study of a government tradingenterprise. management accounting research ,14(2), 140–164. perrow, c. (1986). complex organizations (3rd ed.). new york, ny: random house. pfeffer, j. (1992). managing with power: politics and inﬂuence in organizations . boston, ma: harvard business school press. porras, j. i., hargis, k. k., patterson, j., maxﬁeld, d. g., roberts, n., & bies, r. j. (1982). modeling-based organizational development: a longitudinal assessment. the journal of applied behavioral science ,18(4), 433–446. porras, j. i., & hofer, s. j. (1986). common behavior changes in successful organization development efforts. the journal of applied behavioral science ,22(4), 477–494. porras, j. i., & silvers, r. c. (1991). organization development and transformation. annual review of psychology ,42(1), 51–78. porter, m. e. (1980). competitive strategy . new york, ny: macmillan. porter, m. e. (1985). competitive advantage . new york, ny: the free press. ribero, j. a., & scapens, r. w. (2006). institutional theories in management accounting change: contributions, issues and paths for development. qualitative research in accounting and  management ,3(2), 94–111. riemer-reiss, m. l. (1999). applying rogers’ diffusion of innovation theory to assistive technology discontinuance. journal of applied rehabilitation counseling, 30(4), 16–21. rogers, e. m. (1971). diffusion of innovation (2nd ed.). new york, ny: the free press. rogers, e. m. (1995). diffusion of innovation (5th ed.). new york, ny: the free press.references 127rogers, e. m., & shoemaker, f. f. (1971). communication of innovations: a cross-cultural approach (2nd ed.). new york, ny: the free press. romanelli, e., & tushman, m. l. (1994). organizational transformation as punctuated equilibrium: an empirical test. academy of management journal ,37, 1141–1166. rowe, c., birnberg, j. g., & shields, m. (2008). effects of organizational process change on responsibility accounting and managers’ revelations of private knowledge. accounting, organizations and society ,38(2–3), 164–198. rowe, c., birnberg, j. g., & shields, m. (2011). framing emergent games for hardening soft new accounting information . working paper. purdue university. rumelt, r. p. (1974). strategy, structure, and economic performance . boston, ma: harvard business school press. sandberg, b. (2007). enthusiasm in the development of radical innovations. creativity and innovation management ,16(3), 265–273. schroeder, d. m. (1990). a dynamic perspective on the impact of process innovation upon competitive strategies. strategic management journal ,11(1), 25–41. schulz, m. (1998). limits to bureaucratic growth: the density dependence of organizational rule births. administrative science quarterly ,43(4), 845–876. schulz, m. (2001). the uncertain relevance of newness: organizational learning and knowledge ﬂows. academy of management journal ,44(4), 661–681. scott, w. r. (1987). organizations: rational, natural and open systems . englewood cliffs, nj: prentice-hall. silva, m. j., leitao, j., & raposo, m. (2007). barriers to innovation faced by manufacturing ﬁrms in portugal: how to overcome it? mpra paper no. 5408, working paper. simon, c. (2007). a conﬁguration form of ﬁt in management accounting contingency theory: an empirical investigation. the business review ,7(2), 220–227. simons, r. (1987). accounting control systems and business strategy: an empirical analysis. accounting, organizations and society ,12(4), 357–374. sisaye, s. (1996). two approaches to internal auditing and control systems: a comparison of reengineering and total quality management (tqm). internal auditing ,11(4), 37–47. sisaye, s. (1997). a power control exchange framework of accounting: applications to management control systems , studies in managerial and financial accounting (vol. 5). greenwich, ct: jai press. sisaye, s. (1999). an organizational approach for the study of the diffusion of process innovation strategies in internal auditing and control systems. international journal of applied quality management ,2(2), 279–293. sisaye, s. (2001). organizational change and development in management control systems: process innovation for internal auditing and management accounting , studies in managerial and financial accounting (vol. 10). amsterdam, the netherlands: jai elsevier science. sisaye, s. (2003). process innovation and adaptive institutional change strategies in manage- ment control systems: activity based costing as administrative innovation. advances in management accounting ,11, 251–285. sisaye, s. (2005). management control systems and organizational development: new directions for managing work teams. the leadership & organization development journal ,26(1),51–61.organizational learning and process innovations 128sisaye, s. (2006). the ecology of management accounting and control systems: implications for managing teams and work groups in complex organizations , praeger publications in business & economics series. greenwich, ct: greenwood publishing group. sisaye, s. (2011). the functional-institutional and consequential-conﬂictual sociological approaches to accounting ethics education: implications from sustainability and ecological resources management literature. managerial auditing journal ,26(3), 263–294. sisaye, s., & birnberg, j. g. (2010a). organizational development and transformational learning approaches in process innovations: a review of the implications to the management accounting literature. review of accounting and finance ,9(4), 337–362. sisaye, s., & birnberg, j. g. (2010b). extent and scope dimensions of diffusion and adoption of process innovations in management accounting systems. international journal of accounting and information management ,18(2), 118–139. sisaye, s., & bodnar, g. (1994). total quality management (tqm) and internal auditing: a synthesis. internal auditing ,10(1), 19–31. sisaye, s., & bodnar, g. (1996). reengineering as a process innovation approach to internal auditing. internal auditing ,11(3), 16–25. sisaye, s., & stommes, e. s. (1985). green revolution as a planned intervention strategy for agricultural development: a systems perspective. public administration and develop- ment,5(1), 39–55. smircich, l. (1983). concepts of culture and organizational analysis. administrative science quarterly ,28(3), 339–358. soete, l., & turner, r. (1984). technology diffusion and the rate of technological change. the economic journal ,94(september), 612–623. speckbacher, g., bischof, j., & pfeiffer, t. (2003). a descriptive analysis on the implementation of balanced scorecards in german-speaking countries. management accounting research ,14(4), 361–388. stata, r. (1989). organizational learning — the key to management innovation. sloan management review ,30(3), 63–74. steiner, g. a. (1979). contingency theories of strategy and strategic management. in d. e. schendel & c. w. hofer (eds.), strategic management (pp. 405–416). boston, ma: little, brown. steiner, g. a., miner, j. b., & gray, e. r. (1982). management policy and strategy . new york, ny: macmillan. stommes, e. s. (2001). collaboration and organizational management: systems approach to inter-divisional collaboration. in s. sisaye (ed.), organizational change and development in management control systems (pp. 245–262). amsterdam, the netherlands. strang, d., & soule, s. a. (1998). diffusion in organizations and social movements: from hybrid corn to poison pills. annual review of sociology ,24, 265–290. suarez, f., & oliva, r. (2005). environmental change and organizational transformation. industrial and corporate change ,14(6), 1017–1041. taylor, s. (2005). from border control to migration management: the case for a paradigm change in the western response to trans-border population movement. social policy and administration ,39(6), 563–586. teece, d. j. (1996). firm organization, industrial structure, and technological innovation. journal of economic behavior and organization ,31(2), 193–224.references 129thomas, j. b., sussman, s. w., & henderson, j. c. (2001). understanding strategic learning: linking organizational learning, knowledge, management, and sense making. organiza- tional science ,12(3), 331–345. thompson, j. d. (1967). organizations in action . new york city, ny: mcgraw-hill. tippins, m. j., & sohi, r. s. (2003). it competency and ﬁrm performance: is organizational learning a missing link. strategic management journal ,24(8), 745–761. tushman, m. l., newman, w. h., & romanelli, e. (1986). convergence and upheaval: managing the unsteady pace of organizational evolution. california management review ,29(1), 29–44. tushman, m. l., & o’reilly, c. a., iii. (1996). ambidextrous organizations: managing evolutionary and revolutionary change. california management review ,38(4), 8–30. tushman, m. l., & romanelli, e. (1985). organizational evolution: a metamorphosis model of convergence and reorientation. research in organizational behavior ,7, 171–222. uhlenbruck, k., meyer, k. e., & hitt, m. a. (2003). organizational transformation in transition economics: resource-based and organizational learning perspectives. journal of management studies ,40(2), 257–282. van de ven, a. h. (1986). central problems in the management of innovation. management science ,32(5), 590–607. van de ven, a. h., & poole, m. s. (1995). explaining development and change in organizations. academy of management review ,20, 510–540. van haaften, w. (2007). the structure of paradigm change. new ideas in psychology ,25, 207–220. vera, d., & crossan, m. (2004). strategic leadership and organizational learning. academy of management review ,29(2), 22–240. vogel, d. (1987). the new political science of corporate power. the public interest ,20(spring), 63–79. weinjert, b. (2002). integrating models of diffusion of innovations: a conceptual framework. annual review of sociology ,28, 297–326. west, m. a., & farr, j. l. (1989). innovation at work: psychological perspectives. social behaviour ,4(1), 15–30. whitmeyer, j. m. (1994). why actor models are integral to structural analysis. sociological theory ,12(2), 153–165. williamson, o. e. (1975). markets and hierarchies . new york, ny: the free press. williamson, o. e. (1987). the economics of organization: the transaction cost approach. american journal of sociology ,87(3), 548–577. windrum, p. (2001). late entrant strategies in technological ecologies: microsoft’s use of standards in the browser wars. international studies of management and organization , 31(1),87–105. witt, u. (1997). ‘lock-in’ vs. ‘critical masses’ – industrial change under network externalities. international journal of industrial organization ,15(6), 753–773. yasairdekani, m., & nystrom, p. c. (1996). designs for environmental scanning systems: tests of a contingency theory. management science ,42(2), 187–204. yeo, r. k. (2007). change in(ter)ventions to organizational learning: bravo to leaders as unifying agents. the learning organization ,14(6), 524–552. young, r. l., houghland, j. c., jr., & shepard, j. c. (1981). innovation in open systems: a comparative study of banks. sociology and social research ,65(2), 177–193.organizational learning and process innovations 130young, s. m. (1992). a framework for successful adoption and performance of japanese manufacturing practices in the united states. academy of management review ,17(4), 677–700. zaltman, g., duncan, r., & holbek, j. (1973). innovations and organizations . new york, ny: wiley. zamutto, r. f., & o’connor, e. j. (1992). gaining advanced manufacturing technologies’ beneﬁts: the roles of organizational design and culture. academy of management review ,17(4), 701–728. zetka, j. r., jr. (1998). the technological foundations of task-coordinating structures in new work organizations: theoretical notes from the case of abdominal organizations. work and occupations ,25(3), 356–379.references 131author index albright, t., 39, 109 alstyne, m. v., 78ambrose, m. l., 6–7, 60, 64 anderson, s. w., 19, 28, 78, 106–107 ansari, s. l., 24, 76, 85, 106–107 antonacopoulou, e., 94argyris, c., 10–11, 17, 19, 34, 36, 39, 41–42, 117 arnold, p., 84arthur, j. b., 93–94 attewell, p., 9, 18, 24, 26, 99 bacharach, s. b., 80 bamberger, p., 80banker, r. d., 38, 45–46, 85–86, 103baptista, r., 26, 28bapuji, h., 11, 91, 95, 113barley, s. r., 110 barnett, w. p., 3, 25, 80, 106 barron, m., 68behery, m. h., 82–83benedetto, a. d., 53, 113berdrow, i., 94bessant, j., 2, 12–13, 35bies, r. j., 74birnberg, j. g., 13, 22, 39, 41, 48–50, 62, 65, 69, 71, 96, 99 bischof, j., 39, 109blackman, d., 13boal, k. b., 109boeker, w., 55brass, d. j., 7brown, j. s., 90, 94brunsson, n., 20, 24, 104, 107bryant, s. e., 92 brynjolfsson, e., 78 buller, p. f., 74–75burkhadt, m. e., 7burns, t., 51–52, 63, 107burt, s., 15butler, j. e., 15, 26, 28 calantone, r. j., 53, 113 carroll, g. r., 3, 25, 80 champy, j., 80chan, p., 88chia, y. m., 67christmann, p., 112coghlan, d., 61, 64coleman, j., 20–21, 114connelly, j., 13 cooper, r., 88 crossan, m., 10–11, 61, 64, 82–83, 91, 94, 95, 113 cucuzza, t. g., 27, 37, 76, 118curry, t. r., 17cyert, r. m., 2, 21, 104 daft, r. l., 24, 44, 66–67 damanpour, f., 16, 20, 43–45, 66–67, 77, 109 davenport, t. h., 11, 19, 67 davidson, w. h., 81–82davis, s., 39, 109dearing, j. w., 23, 101 133dent, j., 105 dibella, a. j., 12, 79dirsmith, w. m., 62, 107dixon, j. r., 84 douglas, d. m., 27 drake, a. r., 65dugdale, d., 19, 33, 65dugger, w. m., 56duguid, p., 90, 94duncan, r., 1–2 easterby-smith, m., 94 elenkov, d. s., 44 elkjaer, b., 90engestrom, y., 2, 79ensley, m. d., 44etzioni, a., 55euske, k. j., 24, 76, 85, 106–107evan, w. m., 16, 43–45, 77, 109ezzamel, m., 54–55, 80 farr, j. l., 20, 109 ferdinand, f., 94fichman, r. g., 9fox-wolfgramm, s. j., 109freeman, j., 80, 96frenzel, a., 101 galaskiewicz, j., 56 galbraith, j. k., 57gatignon, h., 22, 31–32, 101–102giddens, a., 58gloet, m., 43glynn, m. a., 8–9, 11, 34gort, m., 26, 28gosselin, m., 19, 24, 33, 39, 45, 50, 52, 66 grace, m., 94grant, r. m., 91grattet, r., 17gray, e. r., 4grupp, h., 101gulden, g. k., 84hage, j., 53, 61, 66haka, s. f., 65hammer, m., 80hannan, m. t., 80, 96 hansen, m. t., 25, 106 hanvanich, s., 95hargis, k. k., 74harrison, g. l., 110hartmann, f., 5haunschild, p. r., 92hauser, k., 80heineke, j. l., 84 hekkert, m. p., 43 henderson, j. c., 11henderson, s., 13hennessy, l., 68herold, d. m., 2herschel, r. t., 27herzog, n. v., 80higgins, c. a., 33 hitt, m. a., 113 holbek, j., 1–2houghland, j. c., 63, 82howell, j. m., 33hull, f., 53, 61, 66hult, g. t.m., 10, 95hunt, j. g., 109huntley, c. l., 93–94 ittner, c. d., 20, 25, 117 jacobs, d., 56 jamali, d., 14, 17, 62jayaraman, n., 2jenness, v., 17jensen, r., 16, 26, 28 johnson, h. t., 65 jones, n. b., 27jones, o., 79, 94jones, t. c., 19, 33, 65judge, w., 44 kabanoff, b., 7134 author indexkajamaa, a., 79 kandemir, d., 10kaplan, r. s., 19, 36, 38–39, 45, 50, 65, 106 katz, s. e., 20–21, 100, 102, 114kemerer, c. f., 9kerosuo, h., 79kinn, j. s., 84kleysen, r. f., 87–88, 93kober, r., 62koh, h. c., 67krackhardt, d., 7 kratz, m. s., 112 krishnan, t. v., 99kuhlmann, s., 43kuhn, t. s., 14, 69kumar, v., 99kyck, b., 87–88, 93 lanen, w., 25, 117 lant, t. k., 8–9, 11–12, 25, 34–35 lapsley, i., 26larcker, d. f., 20, 25, 117lawrence, t. b., 87–88, 93lawrenson, d. m., 105leagans, j. p., 20–21, 100, 114lee, s. y., 38, 45–46, 85–86, 103lichtenstein, b. b., 9, 91 loomis, c. p., 20–21, 100, 114 lopez, s. p., 9, 88, 92lounsbury, m., 110lumpkin, g. t., 9, 91 macpherson, a., 79, 94 malmi, t., 33, 85–86, 103march, j. g., 2, 21, 104 maueus, m. k., 87–88, 93 maxﬁeld, d. g., 74mcadams, r., 28mcallister, j. p., 62, 107mcevoy, g. m., 74–75mckinnon, j. l., 110menzel, h., 20–21, 114metzger, m. b., 8–9meyer, k. e., 113mezias, s. j., 8–9, 11–12, 25, 34–35miner, j. b., 4 molinsky, a. l., 110 morgan, g., 7morrill, c., 53mulligan, p., 84 naranjo-gil, d., 5 narayanaswamy, c. r., 2negro, s. o., 43 ness, j. a., 27, 37, 76, 118 newman, w. h., 4ng, j., 62norton, d. p., 36, 38–39, 45, 50, 106nystrom, p. c., 4 o’connor, e. j., 69, 80 oliva, r., 79 ordas, c. j.v., 9, 88, 92 ozsomer, a., 53, 113 paper, d., 80 patterson, j., 74paul, b. j., 62pearce, c. l., 44peon, j. m.m., 9, 88, 92 perera, s., 110 perrow, c., 24, 54, 58, 63pfeffer, j., 21, 104pfeiffer, t., 39, 109phillips, m. j., 8–9polajnar, a., 80poole, m. s., 80porras, j. i., 74 porter, m. e., 4, 11, 25–26, 28 potter, g., 38, 45–46, 85–86, 103 ravenscroft, s. p., 65 reck, r. h., 84renshaw, a. a., 78rhee, m., 92author index 135ribero, j. a., 6, 52 roberts, n., 74robertson, t. s., 22, 31–32, 101–102 rogers, e. m., 11, 17–21, 23–24, 27, 32, 101, 110, 114 romanelli, e., 4, 79rowe, c., 13, 39, 48–50, 69, 96, 99 rumelt, r. p., 112 sandberg, b., 9, 11, 18, 28, 36, 98, 102–104 scapens, r. w., 6, 52 schminke, m., 6–7, 60, 64schon, d. a., 10–11, 17, 34, 36, 39, 41–42, 117 schroeder, d. m., 26, 28schulz, m., 9, 18, 97, 104–105, 107–108, 115, 117 scott, w. r., 24, 63shepard, j. c., 63, 82shields, m., 13, 39, 48–50, 69, 96, 99 shoemaker, f. f., 11, 17, 19–21, 32 simon, c., 5simon, h. a., 2 simons, r., 5 sisaye, s., 5, 8–9, 17, 22, 41, 44, 49, 53, 57–58, 60, 62, 65, 69,71, 75, 77, 81, 83 sivakumar, k., 95smirich, l., 73smits, r. e. h. m., 43soete, l., 15 sohi, r. s., 95 sonnenstuhl, w. j., 80soule, s. a., 1, 26, 29, 68, 114speckbacher, g., 39, 109srinivasan, d., 38, 45–46stalker, g. m., 51–52, 63, 107stata, r., 9, 11, 34steiner, g. a., 4stommes, e. s., 48–49, 67strang, d., 1, 26, 29, 68, 114suarez, f., 79 sussman, s. w., 11 suurs, r. a. a., 43 taylor, s., 14 teece, d. j., 46terborg, j. r., 92terziovski, m., 43thomas, j. b., 11 thompson, j. d., 54 tippins, m. j., 95tonchia, s., 80turner, r., 15tushman, m. l., 4, 79tzortzopoulos, p., 88 uhlenbruck, k., 113 van de ven, a. h., 12, 35, 69, 80, 110 van haaften, w., 14 vera, d., 10, 61, 64, 82–83vogel, d., 56 weinjert, b., 22–23, 29–31, 60–61, 98, 100, 102, 114 west, m. a., 20, 109 whitmeyer, j. m., 6will, r. a., 26, 28williamson, o. e., 54, 96willmott, h., 54–55, 80windrum, p., 9witt, u., 15 worthington, f., 80 wright, e., 26wright, p., 44 yasairdekani, m., 4 yeo, r. k., 51, 89young, r. l., 63, 82136 author indexyoung, s. m., 19, 28, 78, 107 zajac, e. j., 112zaltman, g., 1–2 zamutto, r. f., 69, 80zetka, j. r., 54author index 137subject index access to resources, 7 accounting innovations, xiv, xv, xx, xxi, xxii, xxiii, 3, 4, 11, 18, 19, 21, 24, 26, 27, 29, 33–39, 41, 48–49, 50, 51, 52, 63, 66, 72, 73, 75, 76,84, 85–86, 99, 103, 104, 107, 109,110, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119 accounting innovations lag, 16accounting rules, 104–105 birth, 104–105bureaucratization, 104–105 acquisition of knowledge, 88, 89, 90, 104 activity based costing (abc), xvii, xvi, xvii, xviii, xxi, xxii, xxiii, 4,19, 20, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28–29, 33,37–38, 46, 48, 49, 73, 75–76, 77,81, 83, 85, 99, 103, 106, 107, 108,117, 118 activity based management (abm), 27, 37–38, 99 adaptation, 12, 31, 58, 59, 73, 88, 89, 91, 97, 98, 101, 109 adaptive change, xixadministrative hierarchy, 66administrative innovations, xviii, 3, 14, 16, 24, 38, 39, 44–46, 50, 63, 66–70, 71, 72, 76–78, 84, 85, 109, 110 administrative reform, 37, 68, 109administrative structures, 41, 53, 68, 74, 77administrative systems, 36, 41, 56, 78, 84 adopters of innovations, 32 adoption of innovations, xviii, 3, 5, 15, 16, 17, 22–29, 31, 50, 67, 77, 95, 98, 100 early adopters, 17, 21inﬂuential adopters, 17, 32 agents, 1, 15, 19, 23, 26, 27, 30, 49, 61, 67, 74, 75, 99, 101, 114 change agents, 1, 19, 23, 30, 49, 61, 67, 75, 99, 101, 114 organizational development agents (od), xxi, 25, 50,71–86, 99, 108, 109, 110,111, 115–119 attitudinal changes, 67autonomous innovations, xviii, 39, 46, 47, 49, 50, 72, 85 balanced scorecard (bsc), 4, 36, 38, 39, 45, 83, 98, 108, 109,110, 117, 118 barriers to change/innovations, 1 cultural, 68industrial, 6management, 28 structural/organizational, 67, 69, 77, 80, 81, 83 behavioral change, 67, 79, 91 beliefs, 17, 29, 31, 56, 73, 74, 75, 78, 102 139bottom-up change, 45 bottom-up participation, 75, 77boundary spanners, 48broad changes, 47 budgets, 7, 36, 37, 45, 58 bureaucratic process/behaviors, 58–59 business process reengineering (bpr), 20, 28, 44, 80–81, 83, 116 business transformation, 81, 83 centralization, 3, 24, 55, 56, 66, 98 centralized structures, 24, 52, 54, 60, 63, 85, 109 champions of innovations, 27, 30, 32, 49, 93, 97, 102 change agents, 1, 19, 23, 30, 49, 61, 67, 75, 99, 101, 114 change champions, 67, 75 changes block changes, 63facilitators, 49, 67 choice among alternatives, 15coalition, 15, 21, 30, 55, 56, 60, 104 formation, 21, 104groups, 56, 60power, 15, 56 coercion, 31, 57 coercive accounting control systems, 54 cognitive changes, 90, 91 communication, 1, 10, 14, 17, 23, 29, 30, 32, 61, 64, 67, 68, 77, 80,84, 90, 99, 100, 101, 102, 104 horizontal, xxlateral, 53, 64 oral, 90 vertical, 44written, 90 competitive advantage, xiii, xvi, 9, 10, 11, 28, 34, 91, 92, 94,95, 112, 113 complementary assets, 112complex organizations, xiv, 22, 54, 56, 113, 115 complex structures, xiv, 52, 54, 84, 109, 110 comprehensive change, xxi, 79conﬂict radical theory, 8–9 conﬂict theory of sociology, 5consequential, 8, 9, 105consultants, 26, 33, 39, 46, 50, 61, 100 content, 80 context, 88 contextual factors, 28, 29, 51, 52contingency theory of accounting, 115 continuous change, 12, 13, 25, 34, 35, 64 continuum, 36, 39, 41, 42, 46, 47, 71control formal control systems, xx, 57, 58, 59, 64, 65, 66 less formal (informal) control systems, 49 cooperation, 10, 21, 48, 62, 65, 69, 75, 77, 91, 108 coordination, xix, 3, 36, 38, 45, 48, 50, 54, 55, 57, 59, 60, 61, 63, 64, 65, 76, 87, 89 corporation, 9, 10, 27, 56, 76 cost-beneﬁt analysis, 12, 21, 24, 31, 35, 104 cost management, 106cost-saving, 15, 80, 113crisis, 57, 58, 59, 97crisis management, 57–58 cultural changes, 59, 68, 69, 74, 75, 77, 79, 88, 100, 104, 116, 117 cultures, 10, 14, 17, 20, 23, 24, 31, 36, 44, 56, 57, 67, 73, 74, 84, 90, 110 customers, 3, 10, 59, 103, 113, 118 satisfaction, 118 value, 94140 subject indexdecentralization, 24, 66 decentralized repair depots, 106decentralized structures, 14, 51, 52, 53, 54, 56, 63, 65, 66, 109 decision-making, xviii, xx, 4,5, 7, 21, 24, 27, 52, 53, 56, 60, 62, 63,66, 78, 80, 105 decisions, 4, 5, 6, 7, 11, 15, 17, 22, 23, 24, 31, 48, 53, 56, 63, 66, 83,85, 86, 92, 105, 110, 114 defenders, 5, 83development economic, 100, 104political, 4social, 4 deviations, 83dialectic change, 79dichotomous change, 71differentiation, xx, 52, 53, 55, 60, 61, 63, 85 diffusion of innovation, xiii, xvi, 4, 9, 15, 16, 22, 23, 28, 29–33, 56,85, 87, 92, 98, 104, 109, 114 discontinuous change, 12–13, 34, 35dissemination, 17, 19, 22, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 62, 63, 65, 85, 86, 88, 95, 97,9 9 ,1 0 0 ,1 0 1 ,1 0 2 ,1 0 3 ,1 0 4 ,1 1 5 ,1 1 6 distribution, 7, 15, 17, 27, 31, 88, 95, 97, 112, 115 divisional/departmental wide changes, 69 divisionalized structures, 57downsizing, 26, 44, 69, 80dynamic capabilities, 95dynamic change, 13dysfunctional, 57, 58, 59 ecology, 5, 6 economic factors, 113 education, 5, 23, 26, 37, 74, 75, 76, 77, 102, 103, 116 efﬁciency, 7, 8, 25, 54, 62, 83, 107, 109, 113employee behaviors/beliefs, 62, 73, 74, 79 employee resistance to change, 76 employee suggestions, 93 enablers of innovations, 2, 69, 111 enthusiasm, 28, 36, 82, 102, 103enthusiastic champions, 102environmental changes, 8, 11, 25, 28, 58, 73, 79, 80, 83, 88, 95, 96,106, 109, 110, 111, 112 environmental contexts, 31, 64, 98environmental factors, 2, 4, 5, 6, 16, 28, 97, 113 external, xix, 4, 28, 97, 113institutional, 16internal, 14, 73organizational, 57 epidemic, 101evolution, 58, 104evolutionary change, 39, 77, 79, 83, 97, 104, 109, 115, 116 exchange, 6, 10, 14, 53, 59, 60, 61, 80, 83, 89, 114 executive group, 53management, 53, 97 experimental study, 39, 109expertise knowledge, 90 externally induced changes, xv facilitation, 4, 11, 20, 24, 32, 34, 36, 43, 49, 53, 56, 58, 59, 67, 69, 74, 82, 110, 114, 117 facilitators, 49, 67, 82, 114failures, xiv, xxii, 3, 5, 17, 19, 20, 53, 92, 104, 106, 115 field study, 39, 109financial information, 65, 84finnish subsidiaries, 85firms, 2, 10, 23, 24, 25, 28, 33, 39, 66, 80, 85, 91, 96, 98, 103, 106,109, 112, 113, 117 flow of innovations, 17, 32, 63, 108subject index 141formal accounting systems, 107 formalization, xviii, 52, 83, 109formal power, 7formal rules, 60, 62, 107 form of organizations, 56 four i’s of learning, 87functionalism, 55functions, xviii, xxii, 7, 46, 47, 49, 54, 58, 65, 69, 71, 72, 80, 81, 83,84, 94, 96, 107, 116, 117 gain sharing, 93–94 gathering knowledge, 95, 97, 115 geographical factors, 106geographical locations, 3, 31geographical outlets, 85, 114geographical settings, 31geographical territories, 30globalization, 28, 31, 102goal congruence, 57 goal orientation, 64 gradual change/learning, 62, 75, 77growth, 8, 56, 57, 59, 64, 74, 75, 82, 97, 102, 104, 106, 112 headquarters, 76, 85, 103, 106heterogeneity of resources, 113heterogeneous groups, 48 hierarchical arrangements, xx, 52, 60 hierarchy, 7, 15, 22, 44, 52, 56, 60, 63, 66, 67, 108 lateral, 53, 60 vertical, xx history of organizations, 68homogeneity, 31, 60 horizontal, xx, 52, 60, 63 ideas, xv, 1, 8, 10, 13, 17, 20, 26, 29, 53, 69, 74, 82, 89, 90, 93, 100, 101, 102, 109, 110 identiﬁcation, 17, 32, 36, 90, 99imitation, 100, 112impediments, 4, 85implementation, xiii, xiv, xv, xviii, xxii, xxiii, 2, 4, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24,26, 27, 28, 29, 33, 34, 35, 36, 38, 39, 46, 48, 53, 60, 62, 65, 67, 75, 76, 78, 81, 85, 86, 95, 98, 99, 103,104, 109, 110, 113, 115, 116,117, 118 incentives, 3, 38, 45, 49, 57, 75, 93incentive schemes, 38, 45incremental changes, xv, xvi, xix, 11, 12, 16, 34, 35, 42, 43, 44, 45, 61, 75, 79, 109, 110, 116, 117, 118 independent, 44, 52, 55, 65, 96 inertia, 96infections, 101information technology (it), xix, xxi–xxii, 16, 19, 55, 69, 81,83–84, 95 innovation champions, 24, 27, 29, 30, 48, 49, 93, 98, 102, 111 innovation lags, 16–18innovations, xv–xvi, 1–18, 19–39, 41–50, 51–70, 71–86, 87–110, administrative innovations, xviii, 3–4, 14, 16, 24, 39, 44,45–46, 50, 63, 66–70, 72, 77,78, 84, 109, 110 autonomous innovations, xviii, 39, 46, 47–48, 72, 85 extent of innovations, xiv, xxiii, 39, 42–45 process innovation typologies, xv, xx–xxi scope of innovations, 41–50sociological theory, xiii systemic innovations, xix, 37, 38, 39, 42, 46, 48–50, 72 technical innovations, xvii, 21, 42–45, 51, 66, 68, 71, 77, 107 innovations as learning input–output analysis, 8, 55, 69, 91142 subject indexinstitutionalization, 52, 57, 58, 62, 65, 75, 93, 102 institutionalizing, 87 institutional theory, xix integrating, xiv, xix, 17, 87, 89, 91 integration, xxi, 11, 13, 45, 64, 67, 72, 84, 88, 89, 91, 93 integrative change, 110interactional justices, 64interdependent, 38, 52, 54, 72, 84, 89, 96, 110 internalization of values, 56 internally induced changes, 92 internal resources, 43, 114international migration, 14interpersonal relationships, 65, 107interpreting, 87intervention adaptation, 101intervention strategies, 25, 73, 74, 75, 78, 86, 109, 115, 116, 119 interventions, xxi, xxii, 2, 61, 73, 74, 75, 78, 79, 85, 86, 93, 108, 109,110, 113, 116, 118–119 intra-organizational innovations, 43intuiting, 87investment, 15, 16, 28, 66 job-related tasks, 54 just-in-time technology (jit), 20 knowledge acquisition of new skills/behaviors, 91, 95 knowledge transfer, 89large scale, 52, 60, 66, 108 leadership, 36, 44, 50, 57–58, 67, 74, 82, 88, 100, 102 characteristics, 5, 58performance, 75, 83 lead–lag effect, 100learning group, 82, 90, 91individual, 90psychological, 88, 90–91social, 90sociological, 91–97 legal factors, 21, 31 legitimacy, 6, 52, 55 long term change, 9, 27, 36, 57, 79, 94, 103, 112, 116, 118 machine metaphor, 7management accounting innovations, 19, 21, 26, 29,33–39, 50, 51, 52, 72, 84–86, 104, 115, 116, 117 management accounting systems, 5, 19–39, 51, 57, 65, 69, 70, 75, 98, 109, 113, 115 management consultants, 26, 33management control systems, 17, 28, 36, 57, 58, 59, 62, 65, 70 management hierarchy, 44, 52, 60, 67 management styles, 23, 30, 82 management, characteristics, 6goalsintensity, 66 marketing management, 19market segments, 31mass communication, 30 mass media, 30, 102, 114 matrix structures, 53mechanistic innovations, xx, 52, 56, 60–63, 66, 107, mechanistic structures, 16, 52, 55, 60, 61, 62, 64, 66 mentoring, 92micro-orientation, 109 mores, 110 narrow changes, 5, 47 non-ﬁnancial measures, 38, 39, 108, 118 norms, xvii, 12, 17, 24, 31, 35, 49, 59, 60, 73, 82, 83, 88, 89, 107, 110, 117subject index 143operating budgets, 37 operating systems/changes, 16, 75, 83, 107 opinion leaders, 17, 21, 23, 27, 29, 32, 97, 100–101, 102, 103 organic innovations, xx, 50, 51, 63–66, 70, 116 organic structures, xx, 53, 63, 64–65, 66 organizational adaptation, 79, 88, 89, 109 organizational behavior, xiii, 11, 19, 32, 34, 79, 88, 110 organizational constraints, 16organizational culture, 44, 57, 58, 82, 83, 84, 89, 107 organizational design, 34organizational development, xxi, 25, 50, 70, 71–81, 84, 85–86,109, 115–118 organizational ﬁt, 117organizational form, 3organizational interdependence, 52, 54, 96 organizational knowledge, 10, 13, 34, 43, 89, 91, 115 organizational learning, xvi–xvii, 9–14, 33–39, 87–110, 111–114 double loop learning, xvii, 6, 12–14, 33, 35–39, 75, 108, 118 gradual learning, 23, 85incremental learning, 8, 10, 14, 105 single loop learning, xvi–xvii, 6, 11–12, 33, 34–35 transformational learning, 38 organizational norms, 59, 83organizational performance, 5, 7, 11, 13, 14, 17, 25, 34, 49, 56,58, 64, 68, 75, 77, 84, 88, 89,92, 96, 112 organizational processes, 1–18, 38organizational renewal, 94organizational resources, 4, 5, 7, 49, 60, 91, 95, 111, 112, 113 organizational size, 24, 52, 55, 56, 57, 60 organizational structural arrangements, 44, 52–53, 66, 67 organizational structures, 6, 7, 36, 41, 45, 50, 51, 52, 55, 56, 63, 64,65–70, 79, 81, 84, 85, 109 organizational transformation, xxi, 71–86, organizational wide changes, 103 paradigm changes, 13, 14 participation, 63, 68, 69, 74, 75, 77, 90, 102 peers, 15, 92, 97, 100performance-based compensation, 103 performance, 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 20, 25, 28, 34, 36, 37,46, 49, 50, 52, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60,61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 68, 69, 70,71, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 80, 81, 82,83, 84, 85, 88, 89, 91, 92, 93, 94,95, 96, 97, 103, 107, 109, 110,112, 113, 116 personal growth, 74 personal inﬂuence, 31, 101 personnel, 67, 77, 78persuasion, 23, 37, 76, 93, 100, 104planned intervention changes/ strategies, 28, 63, 73 planning, 2, 37, 38, 45, 47, 50, 55, 62, 65, 75, 77, 88, 106, 107,109, 111 political power, 15, 56, 104, 106population ecology, 3positions, 2, 7, 23, 45, 58, 114power, 6, 7, 15, 16, 17, 23, 45, 52, 55, 56, 60, 66, 79, 93, 106 prescriptions, 62procedural change, 62, 75, 77144 subject indexprocedures, 2, 6, 10, 12, 13, 16, 20, 35, 36, 52, 57, 59, 60, 61, 62, 83, 87, 88, 92, 93, 95, 107, 108, 109 process innovations, xv–xvi, 5, 7, 11, 17, 19–39, 41–50, 57, 66, 70,71–86, 87–110, 116 process reengineering, 20product development, 27, 38, 48, 108 proﬁtability, 24, 27, 59, 62, 70, 108programmable functions, 62, 107programmed solutions, 105 psychological dimensions of learning, 90–91 quality management, 20 radical change/learning, xix, xxi, 8, 10, 13, 35, 36, 75, 79, 81–83 recycling programs, 110 relationships, 2, 6–7, 8, 9, 15, 25, 27, 32, 38, 50, 60, 61, 62, 65, 66, 69, 80, 89, 90, 92, 96, 107,112, 115 remedies, 83, 93researchers, 4, 7, 9, 19, 20, 21, 26, 33, 39, 50, 100, 114, 115, 117 resistance to change, 3, 48, 76, 79, 82, 93, 97, 106 resources based view of the ﬁrm, 111, 112, 113 resources endowed, 112resource sharing, 62resources, 2–3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 13, 15, 16, 17, 23, 24, 25, 29, 44, 48, 49, 52,56, 58, 60, 80, 84, 88, 91, 94, 95, 108, 111, 112–113, 119 abundance, 112 constraints, 2, 3sharing, 48slack, 2, 23, 29, 112 restructuring, 44, 69, 80, 94, 116, 117returns on innovation investment decreasing returns, 32 revolutionary change/learning, 79reward allocation mechanisms, 62 rewards, 3, 4, 44, 58, 74, 75, 93 risks, 2, 5, 15, 21, 23, 24, 28, 29, 59, 82, 83, 89, 111, 113 routines, 2, 10, 13, 61, 96, 105, 107rule making, 105rules, 7, 13, 36, 49, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 62, 63, 73, 83, 84, 87, 88, 96,104–105, 107, 108 scarce resources, 4, 112simultaneous change, 78size, 24, 28, 31, 32, 52, 53, 55, 56, 57, 60, 66, 98, 107 slack resources, 2, 23, 29social-contagion effect, 102social identity, 90 social inﬂuence, 100 socialization, 31social systems, xviii, 6, 7, 8, 29, 31, 32, 55, 58, 73, 90, 101, 110 sociology, xiii, xiv, xv, xx, 3, 4–9, 11, 19, 20, 21, 22, 32, 41, 42, 51,58, 73, 87, 103 contingency theory of sociology, 4–9 specialization, xx, 24, 55, 61, 109sprinkler strategy, 100standalone innovations, 63, 108standardized systems, 59, 61, 102strategic learning, 10, 11strategic management, 5strategic planning, 37, 47, 55, 106, 111, 118 stratiﬁed, 60structural functional (sf) theory, 5, 6–8 structures, xx, xxi, 2, 6, 7, 9, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 23, 24, 27, 29, 36, 41,42, 43, 44, 45, 49, 51, 52, 53, 54,subject index 14555, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 68, 70, 71, 74, 77, 78,79, 81, 84, 85, 87, 93, 94, 98, 102,106, 109, 113, 116 mechanistic, 16, 52, 55, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 66 organic, xx, 53, 63–64, 65, 66 subordinates, 60, 63, 100success, xiv, xxii, 5, 16, 19, 20, 22, 27, 31, 38, 43, 44, 47, 50, 51, 53,56, 66, 67, 68, 75, 81, 91, 94, 99,109, 112, 115 superordinate, 63supervision, 106supervisory trust, 64survival, 8, 112systemic innovations, xix, 37, 38, 39, 42, 46, 48, 49, 51, 72 systemic learning, 81, 86, 99systems view of organizations, 6, 7, 73 task complexity, 52task coordination, 54task orientation, 7tasks, xviii, xx, 44, 52, 53, 54, 60, 62, 63, 66, 71, 83, 88, 107 teams, 7, 14, 27, 32, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 64, 65, 67, 68, 69, 81, 92 cross functional teams, 54, 58 technical change, xvii, 41, 42, 85, 117 technical innovations, xvii, 21, 42– 45, 51, 66, 68, 70, 71, 77, 85, 107 technical styles, 23, 30, 82techniques, xvii, xxi, 2, 34, 43, 54, 77, 80, 81 technocratic, 57technological change, 15, 28, 43, 47, 49, 96 technological innovations, xviii, xxi, 10, 14, 15, 19, 21, 28, 43, 47,48, 55, 58, 69, 80technological know how, 17tightening, 62top-down, 44, 45, 69top management, 5, 10, 27, 28, 29, 44, 52, 66, 67, 81, 98, 99, 103, 106 total quality management (tqm), xvi, 20 traditional, 38, 39, 54, 55, 61, 62, 67, 76, 108, 109, 118 training, xviii, 67, 74, 75, 77, 90, 91, 92, 95, 116 formal, 90 less formal (informal), 24, 53, 85 transactions exchange, 83 transfer of technology, 102transformational change, xvii, xxiii, 3, 35, 44, 80, 82, 109, 110, 119 transformational leaders, 64, 82transformational learning, 36, 38trialable, 24, 43 trial and error strategy, xvii, 2, 16, 34, 35, 37, 96, 103 trust, 64, 65, 82 uncertainties, 14, 15, 78, 83, 108 units, xiv, xx, 3, 6, 24, 32, 35, 37, 38, 39, 41, 42, 46, 47, 48, 50, 51, 53,54, 55, 56, 62, 63, 65, 66, 72, 73, 75, 80, 84, 86, 94, 96, 97, 103, 107, 108, 109, 116 unknowns, 5, 12, 78 value added processes, 82 values, 5, 17, 31, 35, 48, 49, 56, 64, 67, 68, 73, 74, 78, 80, 82, 94, 100,102, 105, 107, 110 vertical, xx, 44, 52, 60, 85volatile, 57, 96 waterfall strategy, 99 workﬂow, xx, 52–53, 60, 61work functions, 55–56work structures, 20, 54, 109146 subject index